THE present translation was begun in 1913, when I was com- 
pleting my Commentary to Kant's 'Critique of Pure Reason? 
Owing, however, to various causes, I was unable at that time 
to do more than prepare a rough translation of about a third 
of the whole ; and it was not until 1927 that I found leisure 
to revise and continue it. In this task I have greatly profited 
by the work of my two predecessors, J. M. D. Meiklejohn and 
Max Muller. Meiklejohn's work, a translation of the second 
edition of the Critique &gt; was published in 1855. Max Miiller's 
translation, which is based on the first edition of the Critique, 
with the second edition passages in appendices, was published 
in 1 88 1. Meiklejohn has a happy gift which only those who 
attempt to follow in his steps can, I think, fully appreciate 
of making Kant speak in language that reasonably approxi- 
mates to English idiom. Max Miiller's main merit, as he 
has very justly claimed, is his greater accuracy in render- 
ing passages in which a specially exact appreciation of the 
niceties of German idiom happens to be important for the 
sense. Both Meiklejohn and Max Miiller laboured, however, 
under the disadvantage of not having made any very thorough 
study of the Critical Philosophy; and the shortcomings in 
their translations can usually be traced to this cause. 

In the past fifty years, also, much has been done in the 
study and interpretation of the text. In particular, my task 
has been facilitated by the quite invaluable edition of the 
Critique edited by Dr. Raymund Schmidt. Indeed, the ap- 
pearance of this edition in 1926 was the immediate occasion 
of my resuming the work of translation. Dr. Schmidt's restora- 



vi KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

tion of the original texts of the first and second editions of the 
Critique, and especially of Kant's own punctuation so very 
helpful in many difficult and doubtful passages and his cita- 
tion of alternative readings, have largely relieved me of the 
time-consuming task of collating texts, and of assembling the 
emendations suggested by Kantian scholars in their editions 
of the Critique or in their writings upon it. 

The text which I have followed is that of the second 
edition (i 787) ; and I have in all cases indicated any departure 
from it. I have also given a translation of all first edition 
passages which in the second edition have been either 
altered or omitted. Wherever possible, this original first edition 
text is given in the lower part of the page. In the two 
sections, however, which Kant completely recast in the second 
edition The Transcendental Deduction of the Categories and 
The Paralogisms of Pure Reason this cannot conveniently 
be done ; and I have therefore given the two versions in 
immediate succession, in the main text. For this somewhat 
unusual procedure there is a twofold justification; first, that 
the Critique is already, in itself, a composite work, the different 
parts of which record the successive stages in the development 
of Kant's views; and secondly, that the first edition versions 
are, as a matter of fact, indispensable for an adequate under- 
standing of the versions which were substituted for them. The 
pagings of both the first and the second edition are given 
throughout, on the margins the first edition being referred 
to as A, the second edition as B. 

Kant's German, even when judged by German standards, 
makes difficult reading. The difficulties are not due merely to 
the abstruseness of the doctrines which Kant is endeavouring 
to expound, or to his frequent alternation between conflicting 
points of view. Many of the difficulties are due simply to his 
manner of writing. He crowds so much into each sentence, 
that he is constrained to make undue use of parentheses, and, 
what is still more troublesome to the reader, to rely upon 
particles, pronouns and genders to indicate the connections 



TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE vii 

between the parts of the sentence. Sometimes, when our main 
clue is a gender, we find more than one preceding substantive 
with which it may agree. Sometimes, also, Kant uses terms 
in a gender which is obsolete. Certain terms, indeed, he uses 
in more than one gender. Thus, even in regard to so important 
a philosophical term as Verhdltniss&gt; he alternates between 
the feminine and the neuter. But even when these and other 
difficulties, inherent in the original German, have been over- 
come, there remains for the translator the task, from which 
there is no escape, of restating the content of each of the more 
complex sentences in a number of separate sentences. To do 
this without distortion of meaning is probably in most cases 
possible; and indeed I have found that, by patient and care- 
ful handling, even the most cumbrous sentences can generally 
be satisfactorily resolved. 

Certain sentences, however, occurring not infrequently, 
present the translator with another type of problem: how far 
he ought to sacrifice part of what is said, or at least suggested, 
to gain smoothness in the translation. There are sentences 
which, to judge by their irregular structure and by the char- 
acter of their constituents, must have owed their origin to the 
combination of passages independently written and later com- 
bined. In the "four to five months" in which Kant prepared 
the Critique for publication, utilising, in the final version, 
manuscripts written at various dates throughout the period 
1769-1780, he had, it would seem, in collating different state- 
ments of the same argument, inserted clauses into sentences 
that were by no means suited for their reception. In such cases 
I have not attempted to translate the sentences just as they 
stand. Were the irregularities retained, they would hinder, not 
aid, the reader in the understanding of Kant's argument. The 
reader would not, indeed, be able to distinguish between them 
and possible faultiness in the translator's English. Nor would 
it be practicable to retain them, with the addition of explana- 
tory notes; the notes would have to be too numerous, and 
would be concerned with quite trivial points. The irregularities 



viii KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

that are thus smoothed out may, it is true, be of considerable 
importance in the detailed study of the composite origins of 
the Critique^ and of the stages in the development of Kant's 
views. But even in this connection, they are valueless save when 
studied in the ipsissima verba of the original German. In the 
translation itself nothing is being sacrificed that is materially 
worth retaining. 

My chief personal obligations are to Dr. A. C. Ewing. In 
1927, while I was still hesitating whether I could find time 
and energy to complete the translation single-handed, he 
kindly consented, upon my appealing to him, to try the ex- 
periment of collaborating in a joint-translation. We soon 
found, however, that to arrive at a uniform translation in- 
volved so much mutual consultation as hardly to be practic- 
able. But though I am alone responsible for this translation, 
Dr. Ewing has very generously given me assistance at every 
stage in the work. He has read the whole translation both in 
manuscript and in proof; and I have greatly benefited by his 
comments and criticisms. I am also indebted to him for pre- 
paring the index. 

My friends Dr. R. A. Lillie, Mr. R. D. Maclennan, and 
Mr. W. G. Maclagan have done me the service of reading the 
proofs. To Dr. Lillie I am especially indebted for the kindly 
rigour with which he has refused to accept excuses when my 
sentences would seem to be needlessly cumbrous. 

In a careful final revision of the translation I have found 
a number of errors, major and minor; and I fear that others 
must have remained undetected. Should students of the 
Critique y in using this translation, discover any, I shall be 
grateful if they will report them to me. 

NORMAN KEMP SMITH. 



EDINBURGH, October 1929. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 



PAGE 



TITLE PAGE OF FIRST EDITION (in replica) i 

TITLE PAGE OF SECOND EDITION (not in replica) . . 3 

MOTTO ......... 4 

DEDICATION ........ 5 

PREFACE TO FIRST EDITION ...... 7 

PREFACE TO SECOND EDITION . . . . -17 

TABLE OF CONTENTS OF FIRST EDITION . . . -39 

INTRODUCTION . . . . . . . .41 

I. The Distinction between Pure and Empirical Knowledge . 41 
, II. We are in possession of certain Modes of a priori Knowledge, 
and even the Common Understanding is never without 
them ........ 43 

III. Philosophy stands in need of a Science to determine the 

Possibility, the Principles, and the Extent of all a priori 
Knowledge ....... 45 

IV. The Distinction between Analytic and Synthetic Judgments . 48 

V. In all Theoretical Sciences of Reason Synthetic a priori 

Judgments are contained as Principles . . 52 

VI. The General Problem of Pure Reason . . . -55 

VII. The Idea and Division of a Special Science, under the title 

"Critique of Pure Reason" . . . . .58 

I. TRANSCENDENTAL DOCTRINE OF ELEMENTS 
FIRST PART. TRANSCENDENTAL AESTHETIC . . -65 

Introduction . . . . . . . .65 

Section I. Space ....... 67 

Section 2. Time ....... 74 

General Observations on the Transcendental Aesthetic . . 82 

1 [This table of contents, with a few additions referring to Sections omitted, 
altered, or added in B, is the table given in B. The briefer table of A is given 
below on p. 39.] 

ix 



KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 



PAGE 



SECOND PART. TRANSCENDENTAL LOGIC . . . .92 

Introduction. Idea of a Transcendental Logic . . .92 

I. Logic in General ....... 92 

II. Transcendental Logic . . . . . -95 

III. The Division of General Logic into Analytic and Dialectic . 97 

IV. The Division of Transcendental Logic into Transcendental 

Analytic and Dialectic . . . . . .100 

FIRST DIVISION. TRANSCENDENTAL ANALYTIC . . .102 
Book I. Analytic of Concepts . . . . .103 

Chapter I. The Clue to the Discovery of all Pure Concepts of 

the Understanding ...... 104 

Section I. The Logical Employment of the Understanding in 

general ........ 105 

Section 2. The Logical Function of the Understanding in 
Judgments ....... 106 

Section 3. The Pure Concepts of the Understanding, or 
Categories . . . . . . 1 1 1 

Chapter II. The Deduction of the Pure Concepts of Under- 
standing . . . . . . . .120 

Section I. The Principles of any Transcendental Deduction 120 
Transition to the Transcendental Deduction of the Categories 125 

Section 2. Transcendental Deduction of the Pure Concepts 

of Understanding . . . . . .129 

Deduction as in First Edition . . . . .129 

Deduction as in Second Edition . . . 151 

Book II. Analytic of Principles . . . . .176 

Introduction. Transcendental Judgment in General . .177 

Chapter I. The Schematism of the Pure Concepts of Under- 
standing . . . . . . . ., 1 80 

Chapter II. System of all Principles of Pure Understanding . 188 
Section I. The Highest Principle of all Analytic Judgments . 189 
Section 2. The Highest Principle of all Synthetic Judgments 191 

Section 3. Systematic Representation of all the Synthetic 

Principles of Pure Understanding . . . .194 

1. Axioms of Intuition . . . . . .197 

2. Anticipations of Perception . . . . .201 



TABLE OF CONTENTS xi 



PAGE 



3. Analogies of Experience ..... 208 

First Analogy. Principle of Permanence of Substance . 212 

Second Analogy. Principle of Succession in Time, in 
accordance with the Law of Causality . .218 

Third Analogy. Principle of Coexistence, in accord- 
ance with the Law of Reciprocity or Community . 233 

4. The Postulates of Empirical Thought in general . . 239 

Refutation of Idealism ..... 244 

General Note on the System of the Principles . . 252 

Chapter III. The Ground of the Distinction of all Objects in 

general into Phenomena and Noumena . . . 257 

Appendix. The Amphiboly of Concepts of Reflection . . 276 
Note to the Amphiboly of Concepts of Reflection . .281 

SECOND DIVISION. TRANSCENDENTAL DIALECTIC . . . 297 

Introduction ........ 297 

I. Transcendental Illusion ..... 297 

II. Pure Reason as the Seat of Transcendental Illusion . 300 

A. Reason in General ..... 300 

B. The Logical Employment of Reason . . . 303 

C. The Pure Employment of Reason . . . 305 

Book I. The Concepts of Pure Reason .... 308 

Section I. The Ideas in General ..... 309 

Section 2. The Transcendental Ideas . . . 315 

Section 3. System of the Transcendental Ideas . . . 322 

Book II. The Dialectical Inferences of Pure Reason . . 327 

Chapter I. The Paralogisms of Pure Reason . . .328 

The Paralogisms as in First Edition .... 333 

The Paralogisms as in Second Edition .... 368 

Chapter II. The Antinomy of Pure Reason . . . 384 

Section i. System of Cosmological Ideas . . . 386 

Section 2. Antithetic of Pure Reason .... 393 

First Antinomy ....... 396 

Second Antinomy ...... 402 

Third Antinomy ....... 409 

Fourth Antinomy . . . . , . 415 



xii KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

PAGE 

Section 3. The Interest of Reason in these Conflicts . . 422 

Section 4. The Absolute Necessity of a Solution of the Tran- 
scendental Problems of Pure Reason . . 430 

Section 5. Sceptical Representation of the Cosmological 

Questions in the Four Transcendental I4eas . . 436 

Section 6. Transcendental Idealism as the Key to the Solution 

of the Cosmological Dialectic .... 439 

Section 7. Critical Solution of the Cosmological Conflict of 

Reason with itself ...... 443 

Section 8. The Regulative Principle of Pure Reason in its 

application to the Cosmological Ideas . . . 449 

Section 9. The Empirical Employment of the Regulative 

Principle of Reason, in respect of all Cosmological Ideas 454 

I. Solution of the Cosmological Idea of the Totality of the 

Composition of the Appearances of a Cosmic Whole . 455 

II. Solution of the Cosmological Idea of the Totality of Division 

of a Whole given in Intuition .... 459 

Concluding Note and Preliminary Observation . .461 

III. Solution of the Cosmological Idea of Totality in the 

Derivation of Cosmical Events from their Causes . 464 

Possibility of Causality through Freedom . . . 467 

Explanation of the Cosmological Idea of Freedom . 469 

IV. Solution of the Cosmological Idea of the Totality of the 

Dependence of Appearances as regards their Existence 

in general ....... 479 

Concluding Note on the whole Antinomy of Pure Reason 483 

Chapter III. The Ideal of Pure Reason .... 485 
Section i. The Ideal in general ..... 485 
Section 2. The Transcendental Ideal .... 487 

Section 3. The Arguments of Speculative Reason in Proof of 

the Existence of a Supreme Being .... 495 

Section 4. The Impossibility of an Ontological Proof of the 

Existence of God ...... 500 

Section 5. The Impossibility of a Cosmological Proof of the 

Existence of God ...... 507 

Detection and Explanation of the Dialectical Illusion in all 
Transcendental Proofs of the Existence of a Necessary 
Being . . . . . . . .5*4 

Section 6. The Impossibility of the Physico-theological Proof 518 

Section 7. Critique of all Theology based upon Speculative 

Principles of Reason . . . . . -525 



TABLE OF CONTENTS xiii 

PACK 

Appendix to the Transcendental Dialectic . . 532 

The Regulative Employment of the Ideas of Pure Reason . 532 

The Firfal Purpose of the Natural Dialectic of Human 

Reason ........ 549 


II. TRANSCENDENTAL DOCTRINE OF METHOD 

Introduction ........ 573 

Chapter I. The Discipline of Pure Reason .... 574 

Section i. The Discipline of Pure Reason in its Dogmatic 

Employment ....... 576 

Section 2. The Discipline of Pure Reason in respect of its Polemi- 
cal Employment ....... 593 

Impossibility of a Sceptical Satisfaction of the Pure Reason 

that is in Conflict with itself ..... 605 

Section 3. The Discipline of Pure Reason in respect of Hypotheses 612 

Section 4. The Discipline of Pure Reason in respect of its 

Proofs . . . . . . . .621 

Chapter II. The Canon of Pure Reason .... 629 

Section I. The Ultimate End of the Pure Employment of our 

, Reason ........ 630 

Section 2. The Ideal of the Highest Good, as a Determining 

Ground of the Ultimate End of Pure Reason . . 635 

Section 3. Opining, Knowing, and Believing . . . 645 

Chapter III. The Architectonic of Pure Reason . . . 653 

Chapter IV. The History of Pure Reason .... 666 

Index ......... 671 



Ufft 

ter 



retttett 




ton 



3 mm an el $an t 



in 




fy i 9 / 
3cfcann gcubrtcf) 

x 7 8 x. 



Kritik 

der 



reinen Vernunft 



Immanuel Kant 

Professor in K.0nigsberg 
der KGnigl. Akademie der Wissenschaften in Berlin Mitglied 



Zweite bin und wieder verbesserte Auflage 



Riga 

bei Johann Friedrich Hartknoch 
1787 



BACO DE VERULAMIO 
Bii. 

INSTAURATIO MAGNA. PRAEFATIO. 

DE nobis ipsis silemus: De re autem, quae agitur, petimus: ut 
homines earn non Opinionem, sed Opus esse cogitent; ac pro certo 
habeant, non Sectae nos alicujus, aut Placiti, sed utilitatis et ampli- 
tudinis humanae fundamenta moliri. Deinde ut suis commodis aequi 
... in commune consulant, . . . et ipsi in partem veniant. Praeterea 
ut bene sperent, neque Instaurationem nostram ut quiddam infmi- 
tum et ultra mortale fingant, et animo concipiant; quum revera sit 
infiniti erroris finis et terminus legitimus. 1 



1 [This motto added in B.] 



To his Excellency B iii. 

The Royal Minister of State 
Baron von Zedlitz 

HONOURED SIR, Bv. 

To further, so far as in us lies, the growth of the sciences is 
to work along the lines of your Excellency's own interests, which 
are closely bound up with the sciences, not only in virtue of your 
exalted position as a patron, but through your more intimate 
relation to them as lover and enlightened judge. I therefore avail 
myself of the only means that is in any degree in my power, of 
expressing my gratitude for the gracious confidence with which your 
Excellency honours me, if that I could perhaps be of assistance in 
this respect. 

To * the same gracious attention with which your Excellency has B vi. 
honoured the first edition of this work I now dedicate this second 
edition, and therewith I crave the protection 2 of all the other con- 
cerns of my literary mission, and remain with the most profound 
reverence, 

Your Excellency's 

Humble, most obedient servant, 

IMMANUEL KANT 



1 [In A, in place of this closing paragraph, there are the two paragraphs:] 
Whoever limiting his worldly ambitions finds satisfaction in the speculative life, 
has in the approval of an enlightened and competent judge a powerful incentive 
to labours, the benefits of which are great but remote, and therefore such as the 
vulgar altogether fail to recognise. 

To such a judge and to his gracious attention I now dedicate this work, and 
to his protection all the other . . . 

* [Reading zughich seinem Schutze^\ 



PREFACE TO FIRST EDITION A 

HUMAN reason has this peculiar fate that in one species 
of its knowledge it is burdened by questions which, as pre- 
scribed by the very nature of reason itself, it is not able to 
ignore, but which, as transcending all its powers, it is also 
not able to answer. 

The perplexity into which it thus falls is not due to any 
fault of its own. It begins with principles which it has no 
option save to employ in the course of experience, and which 
this experience at the same time abundantly justifies it in 
using. Rising with their aid (since it is determined to this 
alsio by its own nature) to ever higher, ever more remote, 
conditions, it soon becomes aware that in this way the A viii. 
questions never ceasing its work must always remain 
incomplete; and it therefore finds itself compelled to resort 
to principles which overstep all possible empirical employ- 
ment, and which yet seem so unobjectionable that even 
ordinary consciousness readily accepts them. But by this 
procedure human reason precipitates itself into darkness 
and contradictions; and while it may indeed conjecture 
that these must be in some way due to concealed errors, 
it is not in a position to be able to detect them. For since 
the principles of which it is making use transcend the limits 
of experience, they are no longer subject to any empirical 
test. The battle-field of these endless controversies is called 
metaphysics. 

Time was when metaphysics was entitled the Queen of 
all the sciences; and if the will be taken for the deed, the pre-. 
eminent importance of her accepted tasks gives her every 
right to this title of honour. Now, however, the changed 
fashion of the time brings her only scorn; a matron outcast 

7 



8 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

and forsaken, she mourns like Hecuba: Modo maxima rerum^ 
A ix. tot generis natisque pot ens nunc trahor exul, wops? 

Her government, under the administration o'f the dogmat- 
ists, was at first despotic. But inasmuch as the legislation 
still bore traces of the ancient barbarism* her empire gradu- 
ally through intestine wars gave way to complete anarchy; 
and the sceptics^ a species of nomads, despising all settled 
modes of life, broke up from time to time all civil society. 
Happily they were few in number, and were unable to prevent 
its being established ever anew, although on no uniform and 
self-consistent plan. In more recent times, it has seemed as 
if an end might be put to all these controversies and the 
claims of metaphysics receive final judgment, through a 
certain physiology of the human understanding that of the 
celebrated Locke. But it has turned out quite otherwise. For 
however the attempt be made to cast doubt upon the pre- 
tensions of the supposed Queen by tracing her lineage to 
vulgar origins in common experience, this genealogy has, 
as a matter of fact, been fictitiously invented, and she has 
A x. still continued to uphold her claims. Metaphysics has accord- 
ingly lapsed back into the ancient time-worn dogmatism, and 
so again suffers that depreciation from which it was to have 
been rescued. And now, after all methods, so it is believed, 
have been tried and found wanting, the prevailing mood is 
that of weariness and complete indifferentism the mother, 
in all sciences, of chaos and night, but happily in this case 
the source, or at least the prelude, of their approaching 
reform and restoration. For it at least puts an end to that ill- 
applied industry which has rendered them thus dark, confused, 
and unserviceable. 

But it is idle to feign indifference to such enquiries, 
the object of which can never be indifferent to our Jhuman 
nature. Indeed these pretended indijfferentists, however 
they may try to disguise themselves by substituting a 
popular tone for the language of the Schools, inevitably 
fall back, in so far as they think at all, into those very 
, metaphysical assertions which they profess so greatly to 
despise. None the less this indifference, showing itself in the 
midst of flourishing sciences, and affecting precisely those 
Ovid, Metam. [xiii. 508-510]. 



PREFACE TO FIRST EDITION 9 

sciences, the knowledge of which, if attainable, we should 
least of all care to dispense with, is a phenomenon that A xi. 
calls for attention and reflection. It is obviously the effect 
not of levity but of the matured judgment* of the age, which 
refuses to be any longer put off with illusory knowledge. It is 
a call to reason to undertake anew the most difficult of all 
its tasks, namely, that of self-knowledge, and to institute 
a tribunal which will assure to reason its lawful claims, and 
dismiss all groundless pretensions, not by despotic decrees, A xii. 
but in accordance with its own eternal and unalterable 
laws. This tribunal is no other than the critique of pure 
reason. 

I do not mean by this a critique of books and systems, 
but of the faculty of reason in general, in respect of all know- 
ledge after which it l may strive independently of all experi- 
ence. It will therefore decide as to the possibility or impossi- 
bility of metaphysics in general, and determine its sources, 
its extent, and its limits all in accordance with principles. 

I have entered upon this path the only one that has re- 
mained unexplored and flatter myself that in following it I 
have found a way of guarding against all those errors which 
have hitherto set reason, in its non-empirical employment, at 

We often hear complaints of shallowness of thought in our age 
and of the consequent decline of sound science. But I do not see 
that the sciences which rest upon a secure foundation, such as mathe- 
matics, physics, etc., in the least deserve this reproach. On the con- 
trary, they merit their old reputation for solidity, and, in the case 
of physics, even surpass it. The same spirit would have become 
active in other kinds of knowledge, if only attention had first been 
directed to the determination of their principles. Till this is done, in- 
difference, doubt, and, in the final issue, severe criticism, are them- 
selves proofs of a profound habit of thought. Our age is, in especial 
degree, the age of criticism, 2 and to criticism everything must sub- 
mit. Religion through its sanctity, and law-giving through its majesty, 
may seek to exempt themselves from it. But they then awaken just 
suspicion, and cannot claim the sincere respect which reason accords 
only to that which has been able to sustain the test of free and open 
examination. 

1 [Reading, with Adickes, cs for sic.] 

8 \Kritik. This term I have sometimes translated 'criticism' and sometimes 
'critique'.] 



io KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

variance with itself. I have not evaded its questions by plead- 
ing the insufficiency of human reason. On the contrary, I have 
specified these questions exhaustively, accordihg to prin- 
ciples; and after locating the point at which, through mis- 
understanding, reason comes into conflict with itself, I have 

A xiii. solved them to its complete satisfaction. The answer to these 
questions has not, indeed, been such as a dogmatic and vision- 
ary insistence upon knowledge might lead us to expect 
that can be catered for only through magical devices, in which 
I am no adept. Such ways of answering them are, indeed, not 
within the intention of the natural constitution of our reason; 
and inasmuch as they have their source in misunderstanding, 
it is the duty of philosophy to counteract their deceptive in- 
fluence, no matter what prized and cherished dreams may have 
to be disowned. In this enquiry I have made completeness 
my chief aim, and I venture to assert that there is not a single 
metaphysical problem which has not been solved, or for the 
solution of which the key at least has not been supplied. Pure 
reason is, indeed, so perfect a unity that if its principle were 
insufficient for the solution of even a single one of all the 
questions to which it itself gives birth we should have no 
alternative but to reject the principle, since we should then no 
longer be able to place implicit reliance upon it in dealing 
with any one of the other questions. 

While I am saying this I can fancy that I detect in the face 

A xiv. of the reader an expression of indignation, mingled with con- 
tempt, at pretensions seemingly so arrogant and vain-glorious. 
Yet they are incomparably more moderate than the claims 
of all those writers who on the lines of the usual programme 
profess to prove the simple nature of the soul or the necessity 
of a first beginning of the world. For while such writers pledge 
themselves to extend human knowledge beyond all limits of 
possible experience, I humbly confess that this is entirely be- 
yond my power. I have to deal with nothing save reason itself 
and its pure thinking; and to obtain complete knowledge of 
these, there is no need to go far afield, since I come upon them 
in my own self. Common logic itself supplies an example, how 
all the simple acts of reason can be enumerated completely 
and systematically. The subject of the present enquiry is the 
[kindred] question, how much we can hope to achieve by 



PREFACE TO FIRST EDITION n 

reason, when all the material and assistance of experience are 
taken away. 

So much as regards completeness in our determination of 
each question, and exhaustiveness in our determination of all 
the questions with v/hich we have to deal. These questions are 
not arbitrarily selected; they are prescribed to us, by the very 
nature of knowledge itself, as being the subject-matter of our 
critical enquiry. 

As regards theform of our enquiry, certainty and clearness A xv. 
are two essential requirements, rightly to be exacted from any- 
one who ventures upon so delicate an undertaking. 

As to certainty, I have prescribed to myself the maxim, 
that in this kind of investigation it is in no wise permissible to 
hold opinions. Everything, therefore, which bears any manner 
of resemblance to an hypothesis is to be treated as contra- 
band; it is not to be put up for sale even at the lowest price, 
but forthwith confiscated, immediately upon detection. Any 
knowledge that professes to hold a priori lays claim to be 
regarded as absolutely necessary. This applies still more to any 
determination of all pure a priori knowledge, since such deter- 
mination has to serve as the measure, and therefore as the 
[supreme] example, of all apodeictic (philosophical) certainty. 
Whether I have succeeded in what I have undertaken must be 
left altogether to the reader's judgment; the author's task is 
solely to adduce grounds, not to speak as to the effect which 
they should have upon those who are sitting in judgment. JBut 
the author, in order that he may not himself, innocently, be A xvi. 
the cause of any weakening of his arguments, may be permitted 
to draw attention to certain passages, which, although merely 
incidental, may yet occasion some mistrust. Such timely inter- 
vention may serve to counteract the influence which even quite 
undefined doubts as to these minor matters might otherwise 
exercise upon the reader's attitude in regard to the main 
issue. 

I know no enquiries which are more important for ex- 
ploring the faculty which we entitle understanding, and for 
determining the rules and limits of its employment, than those 
which I have instituted in the second chapter of the Trans- 
cendental Analytic under the title Deduction of the Pure 
Concepts of Understanding. They are also those which have 



12 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

cost me the greatest labour labour, as I hope, not unre- 
warded. This enquiry, which is somewhat deeply grounded, 
has two sides. The one refers to the objects of pure under- 
standing, and is intended to expound and render intelligible 
the objective validity of its a priori concepts. It is therefore 
essential to my purposes. The other seeks to investigate the 
pure understanding itself, its possibility and the cognitive 

xvii. faculties upon which it rests; and so deals with it in its sub- 
jective aspect. Although this latter exposition is of great 
importance for my chief purpose, it does not form an essential 
part of it. For the chief question is always simply this: what 
and how much can the understanding and reason know apart 
from all experience? not: how is the faculty of thought itself 
possible? The latter is, as it were, the search for the cause of 
a given effect, and to that extent is somewhat hypothetical 
in character (though, as I shall show elsewhere, it is not really 
so); and I would appear to be taking the liberty simply of 
expressing an opinion, in which case the reader would be free 
to express a different opinion. For this reason I must forestall 
the reader's criticism by pointing out that the objective de- 
duction with which I am here chiefly concerned retains its full 
force even if my subjective deduction should fail to produce 
that complete conviction for which I hope. On this matter, 
what has been said on pp. 92-93 1 should in any case suffice 
by itself. 

As regards clearness, the reader has a right to demand, in 
the first place, a discursive (logical) clearness, through con- 

xviii. cepts, and secondly, an intuitive (aesthetic) clearness, through 
intuitions, that is, through examples and other concrete 
illustrations. For the first I have sufficiently provided. That 
was essential to my purpose; but it has also been the incidental 
cause of my not being in a position to do justice to the second 
demand, which, if not so pressing, is yet still quite reasonable. 
I have been almost continuously at a loss, during the progress 
of my work, how I should proceed in this matter. Examples 
and illustrations seemed always to be necessary, and so took 
their place, as required, in my first draft. But I very soon 
became aware of the magnitude of my task and of the multi- 
plicity of matters with which I should have to deal; and as 
1 [Paging in A.] 



PREFACE TO FIRST EDITION 13 

I perceived that even if treated in dry, purely scholastic 
fashion, the outcome would by itself be already quite suffi- 
ciently large in bulk, I found it inadvisable to enlarge it yet 
further through examples and illustrations. These are neces- 
sary only from a popular point of view; and this work can 
never be made suitable for popular consumption. Such 
assistance is not required by genuine students of the science, 
and, though always pleasing, might very well in this case 
have been self-defeating in its effects. Abbot Terrasson * has 
remarked that if the size of a volume be measured not by the A xix. 
number of its pages but by the time required for mastering it, 
it can be said of many a book, that it would be much shorter 
if it were not so short. On the other hand, if we have in view 
the comprehensibility of a whole of speculative knowledge, 
which, though wide-ranging, has the coherence that follows 
from unity of principle, we can say with equal justice that 
many a book ivould have been much clearer if it had not made 
such an effort to be clear. For the aids to clearness, though 
they may be of assistance 2 in regard to details, often interfere 
with our grasp of the whole. The reader is not allowed to 
arrive sufficiently quickly at a conspectus of the whole; the 
bright colouring of the illustrative material intervenes to cover 
over and conceal the articulation and organisation of the 
system, which, if we are to be able to judge of its unity and 
solidity, are what chiefly concern us. 

The reader, I should judge, will feel it to be no small 
inducement to yield his willing co-operation, when the author 
is thus endeavouring, according to the plan here proposed, to 
carry through a large and important work in a complete and 
lasting manner. Metaphysics, on the view which we are adopt- A xx. 
ing, is the only one of all the sciences which dare promise 
that through a small but concentrated effort it will attain, 
and this in a short time, such completion as will leave no 
task to our successors save that of adapting it in a didactic 
manner according to their own preferences, without their 

1 [The reference is to a posthumous work of Abbot Terrasson, which appeared 
in 1754. Kant was probably acquainted with it in the German translation, pub- 
lished in 1762, under the title, Philosophic nach ihrem allgemeinen Einflusse 
auf alle Gegenstande des Geistes und der Sitten. The passage cited is on p. 117 
of that translation.] 

* [Reading, with Rosenkranz, helfen for fe A/en.] 



H KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

being able to add anything whatsoever to its content. For it 
is nothing but the inventory of all our possessions through 
pure reason, systematically arranged. In this field nothing 
can escape us. What reason produces entirely out of itself 
cannot be concealed, but is brought to light by reason itself 
immediately the common principle has been discovered. 
The complete unity of this kind of knowledge, and the fact 
that it is derived solely from pure concepts, entirely unin- 
fluenced by any experience or by special intuition, such as 
might lead to any determinate experience that would enlarge 
and increase it, make this unconditioned completeness not 
only practicable but also necessary. Tecum habita, et noris 
quam sit tibi curta supellex.* 

A xxi. Such a system of pure (speculative) reason I hope myself 
to produce under the title Metaphysics of Nature. It will be 
not half as large, yet incomparably richer in content than this 
present Critique, which has as its first task to discover the 
sources and conditions of the possibility of such criticism, 
clearing, as it were, and levelling what has hitherto been waste- 
ground. In this present enterprise I look to my reader for the 
patience and impartiality of a judge\ whereas in the other t l 
shall look for the benevolent assistance of a fellow -worker. 
For however completely all the principles of the system are 
presented in this Critique, the completeness of the system 
itself likewise requires that none of the derivative concepts 
be lacking. These cannot be enumerated by any a priori com- 
putation, but must be discovered gradually. Whereas, there- 
fore, in this Critique the entire synthesis of the concepts has 
been exhausted, there will still remain the further work of 
making their analysis similarly complete, a task which is 
rather an amusement than a labour. 

I have only a few remarks to add of a typographical 
character. As the beginning of the printing was delayed, I 
A xxii. was not able to see more than about half of the proof-sheets, 
and I now find some misprints, which do not, however, affect 
the sense except on p. 379, line 4 from the bottom, 1 where 
specific has to be read in place of sceptical. The antinomy 

a Persius [Sat. iv. 52]. 
[Paging in A.] 



PREFACE TO FIRST EDITION 15 

of pure reason, from p. 425 to p. 46 1, 1 has been so arranged, 
in tabular form, that all that belongs to the thesis stands 
on the left and what belongs to the antithesis on the right. 
This I have done in order that proposition and counter- 
proposition may ]pe the more easily compared with one 
another. 

1 [Paging in A.] 



PREFACE TO SECOND EDITION 

WHETHER the treatment of such knowledge as lies within the 
province of reason does or does not follow the secure path of a 
science, is easily to be determined from the outcome. For if 
after elaborate preparations, frequently renewed, it is brought 
to a stop immediately it nears its goal; if often it is com- 
pelled to retrace its steps and strike into some new line of 
approach; or again, if the various participants are unable to 
agree in any common plan of procedure, then we may rest 
assured that it is very far from having entered upon the secure 
path of a science, and is indeed a merely random groping. In 
these circumstances, we shall be rendering a service to reason 
should we succeed in discovering the path upon which it can 
securely travel, even if, as a result of so doing, much that is 
comprised in our original aims, adopted without reflection, 
may have to be abandoned as fruitless. 

That logic has already, from the earliest times, proceeded B viii. 
upon this sure path is evidenced by the fact that since Aris- 
totle it has not required to retrace a single step, unless, indeed, 
we care to count as improvements the removal of certain need- 
less subtleties or the clearer exposition of its recognised teach- 
ing, features which concern the elegance rather than the cer- 
tainty of the science. It is remarkable also that to the present 
day this logic has not been able to advance a single step, and 
is thus to all appearance a closed and completed body of doc- 
trine. If gome of the moderns have thought to enlarge it by 
introducing psychological chapters on the different faculties of 
knowledge (imagination, wit, etc.), metaphysical chapters on 
the origin of knowledge or on the different kinds of certainty 
according to difference in the objects (idealism, scepticism, etc.), 
or anthropological chapters on prejudices, their causes and 
remedies, this could only arise from their ignorance of the 

17 C | 



i8 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

peculiar nature of logical science. We do not enlarge but 
disfigure sciences, if we allow them to trespass upon one 
B ix. another's territory. The sphere of logic is quite* precisely de- 
limited; its sole concern is to give an exhaustive exposition and 
a strict proof of the formal rules of all thought, whether it be 
a priori or empirical, whatever be its origin or its object, and 
whatever hindrances, accidental or natural, it may encounter 
in our minds. 

That logic should have been thus successful is an advan- 
tage which it owes entirely to its limitations, whereby it is 
justified in abstracting indeed, it is under obligation to do 
so from all objects of knowledge and their differences, leaving 
the understanding nothing to deal with save itself and its form. 
But for reason to enter on the sure path of science is, of course, 
much more difficult, since it has to deal not with itself alone 
but also with objects. Logic, therefore, as a propaedeutic, 
forms, as it were, only the vestibule of the sciences; and when 
we are concerned with specific modes of knowledge, while 
logic is indeed presupposed in any critical estimate of 
them, yet for the actual acquiring of them we have to look 
to the sciences properly so called, that is, to the objective 
sciences. 

Now if reason is to be a factor in these sciences, something 
in them must be known a priori, and this knowledge may be 
related to its object in one or other of two ways, either as 
merely determining it and its concept (which must be supplied 
B x. from elsewhere) or as also making it actual. The former is 
theoretical, the latter practical knowledge of reason. In both, 
that part in which reason determines its object completely 
a priori, namely, the pure part however much or little this part 
may contain must be first and separately dealt with, in case 
it be confounded with what comes from other sources ; For it 
is bad management if we blindly pay out what comes in, and 
are not able, when the income falls into arrears, to distinguish 
which part of it can justify expenditure, and in which 1 line we 
must make reductions. 

Mathematics and physics, the two sciences in which reason 
yields theoretical knowledge, have to determine their objects 
a priori, the former doing so quite purely, the latter having 

1 [Reading, with Erdmann, von welchem for von welcher.} 



PREFACE TO SECOND EDITION 19 

to reckon, at least partially, with sources of knowledge other 
than reason. 

In the earliest times to which the history of human reason 
extends, mathematics &gt; among that wonderful people, the 
Greeks, had already entered upon the sure path of science. But 
it must not be supposed that it was as easy for mathematics as 
it was for logic in which reason has to deal with itself alone 
to light upon, or rather to construct for itself, that royal road. B xi. 
On the contrary, I believe that it long remained, especially 
among the Egyptians, in the groping stage, and that the trans- 
formation must have been due to a revolution brought about 
by the happy thought of a single man, the experiment which 
he devised marking out the path upon which the science must 
enter, and by following which, secure progress throughout all 
time and in endless expansion is infallibly secured. The his- 
tory of this intellectual revolution far more important than 
the discovery of the passage round the celebrated Cape of 
Good Hope and of its fortunate author, has not been pre- 
served. But the fact that Diogenes Laertius, in handing down 
an account of these matters, names the reputed author of even 
the, least important among the geometrical demonstrations, 
even of those which, for ordinary consciousness, stand in need 
of no such proof, does at least show that the memory of the 
revolution, brought about by the first glimpse of this new path, 
must have seemed to mathematicians of such outstanding im- 
portance as to cause it to survive the tide of oblivion. A new light 
flashed upon the mind of the first man (be he Thales or some 
other) who demonstrated the properties of the isosceles triangle. 
The true method, so he found, was not to inspect what he dis- B xii. 
cerned either in the figure, or in the bare concept of it, and from 
this, as it were, to read off its properties; but to bring out what * 
was necessarily implied in the concepts that he had himself 
for meet a priori, and had put into the figure in the construction 
by which he presented it to himself. If he is to know anything 
with a priori certainty he must not ascribe to the figure any- 
thing save what necessarily follows from what he has himself 
set into it in accordance with his concept. 

Natural science was very much longer in entering upon the 
highway of science. It is, indeed, only about a century and a 

1 [Reading, with Adickes, sondern das for sondern durch das.] 



20 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

half since Bacon, by his ingenious proposals, partly initiated 
this discovery, partly inspired fresh vigour in those who were 
already on the way to it. In this case also the 'discovery can 
be explained as being the sudden outcome of an intellectual 
revolution. In my present remarks I an\ referring to natural 
science only in so far as it is founded on empirical principles. 
When Galileo caused balls, the weights of which he had 
himself previously determined, to roll down an inclined plane; 
when Torricelli made the air carry a weight which he had cal- 
culated beforehand to be equal to that of a definite volume of 
water; or in more recent times, when Stahl changed metal 

B xiii. into lime, and lime back into metal, by withdrawing some- 
thing and then restoring it, a a light broke upon all students of 
nature. They learned that reason has insight only into that 
which it produces after a plan of its own, and that it must not 
allow itself to be kept, as it were, in nature's leading-strings, 
but must itself show the way with principles of judgment based 
upon fixed laws, constraining nature to give answer to ques- 
tions of reason's own determining. Accidental observations, 
made in obedience to no previously thought-out plan, can 
never be made to yield a necessary law, which alone reasop is 
concerned to discover. Reason, holding in one hand its prin- 
ciples, according to which alone concordant appearances can 
be admitted as equivalent to laws, and in the other hand the 
experiment which it has devised in conformity with these prin- 
ciples, must approach nature in order to be taught by it. It 
must not, however, do so in the character of a pupil who 
listens to everything that the teacher chooses to say, but of 
an appointed judge who compels the witnesses to answer 
questions which he has himself formulated. Even physics, 
therefore, owes the beneficent revolution in its point of view 

B xiv. entirely to the happy thought, that while reason must seek in 
nature, not fictitiously ascribe to it, whatever as not being 
knowable through reason's own resources has to be learnt, 
if learnt at all, only from nature, it must adopt as its guide, 
in so seeking, that which it has itself put into nature. It is thus 
that the study of nature has entered on the secure path of a 

I am not, in my choice of examples, tracing the exact course of 
the history of the experimental method; we have indeed no very pre- 
cise knowledge of its first beginnings. 



PREFACE TO SECOND EDITION 21 

science, after having for so many centuries been nothing but 
a process of merely random groping. 

Metaphysics is a completely isolated speculative science of 
reason, which soars far above the teachings of experience, and 
in which reason is indeed meant to be its own pupil. Meta- 
physics rests on concepts alone not, like mathematics, on their 
application to intuition. But though it is older than all other 
sciences, and would survive even if all the rest were swallowed 
up in the abyss of an all-destroying barbarism, it has not yet 
had the good fortune to enter upon the secure path of a science. 
For in it reason is perpetually being brought to a stand, even 
when the laws into which it is seeking to have, as it professes, 
an a priori insight are those that are confirmed by our most com- 
mon experiences. Ever and again we have to retrace our steps, 
as not leading us in the direction in which we desire to go. So 
far, too, are the students of metaphysics from exhibiting any B xv. 
kind of unanimity in their contentions, that metaphysics has 
rather to be regarded as a battle-ground quite peculiarly suited 
for those who desire to exercise themselves in mock combats, 
and in which no participant has ever yet succeeded in gaining 
even so much as an inch of territory, not at least in such 
manner as to secure him in its permanent possession. This 
shows, beyond all questioning, that the procedure of meta- 
physics has hitherto been a merely random groping, and, 
what is worst of all, a groping among mere concepts. 

What, then, is the reason why, in this field, the sure road 
to science has not hitherto been found? Is it, perhaps, im- 
possible of discovery? Why, in that case, should nature have 
visited our reason with the restless endeavour whereby it is 
ever searching for such a path, as if this were one of its most 
important concerns. Nay, more, how little cause have we to 
place trust in our reason, if, in one of the most important 
domains of which we would fain have knowledge, it does 
not merely fail us, but lures us on by deceitful promises, and 
in the end betrays us! Or if it be only that we have thus far 
failed to find the true path, are there any indications to justify 
the hope that by renewed efforts we may have better fortune 
than has fallen to our predecessors? 

The examples of mathematics and natural science, which 
by a single and sudden revolution have become what they B xvi. 



22 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

now are, seem to me sufficiently remarkable to suggest our 
considering what may have been the essential features in the 
changed point of view by which they have so 'greatly bene- 
fited. Their success should incline us, at least by way of experi- 
ment, to imitate their procedure, so far as the analogy which, 
as species of rational knowledge, they bear to metaphysics may 
permit. Hitherto it has been assumed that all our knowledge 
must conform to objects. But all attempts to extend our know- 
ledge of objects by establishing something in regard to them 
a priori, by means of concepts, have, on this assumption, 
ended in failure. We must therefore make trial whether we 
may not have more success in the tasks of metaphysics, if 
we suppose that objects must conform to our knowledge. This 
would agree better with what is desired, namely, that it should 
be possible to have knowledge of objects a priori, determining 
something in regard to them prior to their being given. We 
should then be proceeding precisely on the lines of Copernicus' 
primary hypothesis. 1 Failing of satisfactory progress irf ex- 
plaining the movements of the heavenly bodies on the supposi- 
tion that they all revolved round the spectator, he tried whether 
he might not have better success if he made the spectator 
B xvii. to revolve and the stars to remain at rest. A similar experi- 
ment can be tried in metaphysics, as regards the intuition 
of objects. If intuition must conform to the constitution of 
the objects, I do not see how we could know anything of 
the latter a priori\ but if the object (as object of the senses) 
must conform to the constitution of our faculty of intuition, 
I have no difficulty in conceiving such a possibility. Since I 
cannot rest in these intuitions if they are to become known, 
but must relate them as representations to something as their 
object, and determine this latter through them, either I must 
assume that the concepts, by means of which I obtain this 
determination, conform to the object, or else I assume that the 
objects, or what is the same thing, that the experience in 
which alone, as given objects, they can be known, conform to 
the concepts. In the former case, I am again in the same per- 
plexity as to how I can know anything a priori in regard to 
the objects. In the latter case the outlook is more hopeful. For 
experience is itself a species of knowledge which involves 

1 \rnit den ersten Gedanken des Kopernikus.\ 



PREFACE TO SECOND EDITION 23 

understanding; and understanding has rules which I must pre- 
suppose as being in me prior to objects being given to me, and 
therefore as being a priori. They find expression in a priori 
concepts to which all objects of experience necessarily con- B xviii 
form, and with which they must agree. As regards objects 
which are thought solely through reason, and indeed as 
necessary, but which can never at least not in the manner 
in which reason thinks them be given in experience, the 
attempts at thinking them (for they must admit of being 
thought) will furnish an excellent test of what we are adopting 
as our new method of thought, namely, that we can know 
a priori of things only what we ourselves put into them.* 

This experiment succeeds as well as could be desired, and 
promises to metaphysics, in its first part the part that is 
occupied with those concepts a priori to which the correspond- 
ing objects, commensurate with them, can be given in ex- 
perience the secure path of a science. For the new point of B xix. 
view enables us to explain how there can be knowledge 
a priori\ and, in addition, to furnish satisfactory proofs of the 
laws which form the a priori basis of nature, regarded as the 
sujn of the objects of experience neither achievement being 
possible on the procedure hitherto followed. But this deduction 
of our power of knowing a priori ', in the first part of metaphysics, 
has a consequence which is startling, and which has theappear- 

This method, modelled on that of the student of nature, con- 
sists in looking for the elements of pure reason in what admits of con- 
firmation or refutation by experiment. Now the propositions of pure 
reason, especially if they venture out beyond all limits of possible 
experience, cannot be brought to the test through any experiment 
with their objects, as in natural science. In dealing with those con- 
cepts VXM&amp;. principles which we adopt a priori, all that we can do is to 
contrive that they be used for viewing objects from two different 
points pf view on the one hand, in connection with experience, as B xix. 
objects of the senses and of the understanding, and on the other 
hand, for the isolated reason that strives to transcend all 1 limits of 
experience, as objects which are thought merely. If, when things are 
viewed from this twofold standpoint, we find that there is agreement 
with the principle of pure reason, but that when we regard them 
only from a single point of view reason is involved in unavoidable 
self-conflict, the experiment decides in favour of the correctness of 
this distinction. 

1 [Reading, with Adickes, iiber alle for it&amp;er.] 



24 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

ance of being highly prejudicial to the whole purpose of meta- 
physics, as dealt with in the second part. For we are brought 
to the conclusion that we can never transcend' the limits of 
possible experience, though that is precisely what this science 

B xx. is concerned, above all else, to achieve. This situation yields, 
however, just the very experiment by which, indirectly, we 
are enabled to prove the truth of this first estimate of our 
a priori knowledge of reason, namely, that such knowledge 
has to do only with appearances, and must leave the thing 
in itself 1 as indeed real per se, but as not known by us. 
For what necessarily forces us to transcend the limits of 
experience and of all appearances is the unconditioned, 
which reason, by necessity and by right, demands in things 
in themselves, as required to complete the series of con- 
ditions. If, then, on the supposition that our empirical know- 
ledge conforms to objects as things in themselves, we find 
that the unconditioned cannot be thought without contradiction, 
and that when, on the other hand, we suppose that our repre- 
sentation of things, as they are given to us, does not conform 
to these things as they are in themselves, but that these objects, 
as appearances, conform to our mode of representation, the 
contradiction vanishes', and if, therefore, we thus find that 
the unconditioned is not to be met with in things, so far as 
we know them, that is, so far as they are given to us, but 
only so far as we do not know them, that is, so far as they 
are things in themselves, we are justified in concluding that 
what we at first assumed for the purposes of experiment is 

B xxi. now definitely confirmed. * But when all progress in the field 
of the supersensible has thus been denied to speculative 
reason, it is still open to us to enquire whether, in the practical 

a This experiment of pure reason bears a great similarity to what 
in chemistry is sometimes entitled the experiment of reduction, or 
more usually the synthetic process. The analysis of the metaphysician 
separates pure a priori knowledge into two very heterogeneous 
elements, namely, the knowledge of things as appearances, and the 
knowledge of things in themselves; his dialectic combines these 
two again, in harmony with the necessary idea of the unconditioned 
demanded by reason, and finds that this harmony can never be ob- 
tained except through the above distinction, which must therefore 
be accepted. 

1 [die Sac he an sich selbst.] 



PREFACE TO SECOND EDITION 25 

knowledge of reason, data may not be found sufficient to de- 
termine reason's transcendent concept of the unconditioned, 
and so to errable us, in accordance with the wish of meta- 
physics, and by means of knowledge that is possible a priori, 
though only from &amp; practical point of view, to pass beyond 
the limits of all possible experience. Speculative reason has 
thus at least made room for such an extension; and if it must 
at the same time leave it empty, yet none the less we are at B xxii. 
liberty, indeed we are summoned, to take occupation of it, 
if we can, by practical data of reason. 

This attempt to alter the procedure which has hitherto 
prevailed in metaphysics, by completely revolutionising it 
in accordance with the example set by the geometers and 
physicists, forms indeed the main purpose of this critique of 
pure speculative reason. It is a treatise on the method, not a 
system of the science itself. But at the same time it marks out 
the whole plan of the science, both as regards its limits and as 
regards its entire internal structure. For pure speculative reason B xxiii. 
has this peculiarity, that it can measure its powers according 
to the different ways in which it chooses the objects of its 
thinking, and can also give an exhaustive enumeration of 
the various ways in which it propounds its problems, and so 
is able, nay bound, to trace the complete outline of a system 
of metaphysics. As regards the first point, nothing in a priori 
knowledge can be ascribed to objects save what the thinking 
subject derives from itself; as regards the second point, pure 
reason, so far as the principles of its knowledge are concerned, 

a Similarly, the fundamental laws of the motions of the heavenly 
bodies gave established certainty to what Copernicus had at first 
assumed only as an hypothesis, and at the same time yielded 
proof of the invisible force (the Newtonian attraction) which holds 
the universe together. The latter would have remained for ever un- 
discovfcred if Copernicus had not dared, in a manner contradictory 
of the senses, but yet true, to seek the observed movements, not in 
the heavenly bodies, but in the spectator. The change in point of 
view, analogous to this hypothesis, which is expounded in the 
Critique, I put forward in this preface as an hypothesis only, in order 
to draw attention to the character of these first attempts at such a 
change, which are always hypothetical. But in the Critique itself it 
will be proved, apodeictically not hypothetically, from the nature 
of our representations of space and time and from the elementary 
concepts of the understanding. 



26 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

is a quite separate self-subsistent unity, in which, as in an 
organised body, every member exists for every other, and 
all for the sake of each, so that no principle can safely be 
taken in any one relation, unless it has been investigated in 
the entirety of its relations to the whole employment of pure 
reason. Consequently, metaphysics has also this singular 
advantage, such as falls to the lot of no other science which 
deals with objects (for logic is concerned only with the form 
of thought in general), that should it, through this critique, 
be set upon the secure path of a science, it is capable of ac- 

B xxiv. quiring exhaustive knowledge of its entire field. Metaphysics 
has to deal only with principles, and with the limits of their 
employment as determined by these principles themselves, 
and it can therefore finish its work and bequeath it to posterity 
as a capital to which no addition can be made. Since it is 
a fundamental science, it is under obligation to achieve this 
completeness. We must be able to say of it: nil actum re- 
putanS) si quid super es set agendum. 

But, it will be asked, what sort of a treasure is this that 
we propose to bequeath to posterity? What is the value of 
the metaphysics that is alleged to be thus purified by criti- 
cism and established once for all? On a cursory view of the 
present work it may seem that its results are merely negative^ 
warning us that we must never venture with speculative reason 
beyond the limits of experience. Such is in fact its primary use. 
But such teaching at once acquires a positive value when we 
recognise that the principles with which speculative reason 
ventures out beyond its proper limits do not in effect extend 
the employment of reason, but, as we find on closer scrutiny, 
inevitably narrow it. These principles properly belong [not 
to reason but] to sensibility, and when thus employed they 

B xxv. threaten to make the bounds of sensibility coextensive with 
the real, and so to supplant reason in its pure (practical) em- 
ployment. So far, therefore, as our Critique limits speculative 
reason, it is indeed negative] but since it thereby removes an 
obstacle which stands in the way of the employment of practi- 
cal reason, nay threatens to destroy it, it has in reality a posi- 
tive and very important use. At least this is so, immediately 
we are convinced that there is an absolutely necessary prac- 
tical employment of pure reason the moral in which it 



PREFACE TO SECOND EDITION 27 

inevitably goes beyond the limits of sensibility. Though 
[practical] reason, in thus proceeding, requires no assistance 
from specula'tive reason, it must yet be assured against its 
opposition, that reason may not be brought into conflict 
with itself. To deny-that the service which the Critique renders 
is positive in character, would thus be like saying that the 
police are of no positive benefit, inasmuch as their main busi- 
ness is merely to prevent the violence of which citizens stand 
in mutual fear, in order that each may pursue his vocation in 
peace and security. That space and time are only forms of sens- 
ible intuition, and so only conditions of the existence of things 
as appearances; that, moreover, we have no concepts of under- 
standing, and consequently no elements for the knowledge of 
things, save in so far as intuition can be given corresponding B xxvi. 
to these concepts; and that we can therefore have no knowledge 
of any object as thing in itself, but only in so far as it l is an 
object of sensible intuition, that is, an appearance all this is 
proved in the analytical part of the Critique. Thus it does in- 
deed follow that all possible speculative knowledge of reason 
is limited to mere objects of experience. But our further con- 
tention must also be duly borne in mind, namely, that though 
we cannot know these objects as things in themselves, we 
must yet be in position at least to think them as things in them- 
selves;" otherwise we should be landed in the absurd conclusion 
that there can be appearance without anything that appears. B xxvii. 
Now let us suppose that the distinction, which our Critique has 
shown to be necessary, between things as objects of experience 
and those same things as things in themselves, had not been 
made. In that case all things in general, as far as they are 

To know an object I must be able to prove its possibility, either 
from its actuality as attested by experience, or a priori by means of 
reason. But I can think whatever I please, provided only that I do 
not contradict myself, that is, provided my concept is a possible 
thought. This suffices for the possibility of the concept, even though 
I may not be able to answer for there being, in the sum of all possi- 
bilities, an object corresponding to it. But something more is re- 
quired before I can ascribe to such a concept objective validity, that 
is, real possibility; the former possibility is merely logical. This some- 
thing more need not, however, be sought in the theoretical sources of 
knowledge; it may lie in those that are practical. 
1 [Reading, with Erdmann, er for .] 



28 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

efficient causes, would be determined by the principle of caus- 
ality, and consequently by the mechanism of nature. I could 
not, therefore, without palpable contradiction, say of one and 
the same being, for instance the human soul, that its will is free 
and yet is subject to natural necessity, that is, is not free. For 
I have taken the soul in both propositions in one and the same 
sense, namely as a thing in general, that is, as a thing 1 in itself; 
and save by means of a preceding critique, could not have done 
otherwise. But if our Critique is not in error in teaching that 
the object is to be taken in a twofold sense, namely as appear- 
ance and as thing in itself; if the deduction of the concepts of 
understanding is valid, and the principle of causality there- 
fore applies only to things taken in the former sense, namely, 
in so far as they are objects of experience these same objects, 
taken in the other sense, not being subject to the principle 
then there is no contradiction in supposing that one and the 

B xxviii. same will is, in the appearance, that is, in its visible acts, 
necessarily subject to the law of nature, and so far not free \ 
while yet, as belonging to a thing in itself, it is not subject 
to that law, and is therefore free. My soul, viewed from the 
latter standpoint, cannot indeed be known by means of specu- 
lative reason (and still less through empirical observation); 
and freedom as a property of a being to which I attribute effects 
in the sensible world, is therefore also not knowable in any 
such fashion. For I should then have to know such a being as 
determined in its existence, and yet as not determined in time 
which is impossible, since I cannot support my concept by any 
intuition. But though I cannot know, I can yet think freedom; 
that is to say, the representation of it is at least not self-con- 
tradictory, provided due account be taken of our critical dis- 
tinction between the two modes of representation, the sensible 
and the intellectual, and of the resulting limitation of the, pure 
concepts of understanding and of the principles which flow 
from them. 

If we grant that morality necessarily presupposes freedom 
(in the strictest sense) as a property of our will; if, that is to 
say, we grant that it yields practical principles original prin- 
ciples, proper to our reason as a priori data of reason, and 

B xxix. that this would be absolutely impossible save on the assump- 

1 [Sache.] 



PREFACE TO SECOND EDITION 29 

tion of freedom; and if at the same time we grant that 
speculative reason has proved that such freedom does not 
allow of being thought, then the former supposition that 
made on behalf of morality would have to give way to this 
other contention, the opposite of which involves a palpable 
contradiction. For since it is only on the assumption of free- 
dom that the negation of morality contains any contradiction, 
freedom, and with it morality, would have to yield to the 
mechanism of nature. 

Morality does not, indeed, require that freedom should be 
understood, but only that it should not contradict itself, and 
so should at least allow of being thought, and that as thus 
thought it should place no obstacle in the way of a free act 
(viewed in another relation) likewise conforming to the mechan- 
ism of nature. The doctrine of morality and the doctrine of 
nature may each, therefore, make good its position. This, 
however, is only possible in so far as criticism has previously 
established our unavoidable ignorance of things in themselves, 
and has limited all that we can theoretically know to mere 
appearances. 

, This discussion as to the positive advantage of critical 
principles of pure reason can be similarly developed in regard 
to the concept of God and of the simple nature of our soul\ but 
for the sake of brevity such further discussion may be omitted. 
[From what has already been said, it is evident that] even the 
assumption as made on behalf of the necessary practical em- B xxx. 
ployment of my reason of God, freedom^ and immortality is 
not permissible unless at the same time speculative reason be 
deprived of its pretensions to transcendent insight. For in order 
to arrive at such insight it must make use of principles which, 
in fact, extend only to objects of possible experience, and 
which, if also applied to what cannot be an object of experience, 
always really change this into an appearance, thus rendering 
allpractua/extenszonofpureresison impossible. I have therefore 
found it necessary to deny knowledge^ in order to make room 
tor faith* The dogmatism of metaphysics, that is, the precon- 
ception that it is possible to make headway in metaphysics with- 
out a previous criticism of pure reason, is the source of all that 
unbelief, 2 always very dogmatic, which wars against morality. 

1 [Glaubc.} [Ung/aube.] 



30 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

Though it may not, then, be very difficult to leave to pos- 
terity the bequest of a systematic metaphysic, constructed in 
conformity with a critique of pure reason, yet such a gift is 
not to be valued lightly. For not only will reason be enabled 
to follow the secure path of a science, insjtead of, as hitherto, 

B xxxi. groping at random, without circumspection or self-criticism; 
our enquiring youth will also be in a position to spend 
their time more profitably than in the ordinary dogmatism 
by which they are so early and so greatly encouraged to 
indulge in easy speculation about things of which they 
understand nothing, and into which neither they nor any- 
one else will ever have any insight encouraged, indeed, to 
invent new ideas and opinions, while neglecting the study 
of the better-established sciences. But, above all, there is 
the inestimable benefit, that all objections to morality and 
religion will be for ever silenced, and this in Socratic fashion, 
namely, by the clearest proof of the ignorance of the objectors. 
There has always existed in the world, and there will always 
continue to exist, some kind of metaphysics, and with it the 
dialectic that is natural to pure reason. It is therefore the first 
and most important task of philosophy to deprive met- 
physics, once and for all, of its injurious influence, by attack- 
ing its errors at their very source. 

Notwithstanding this important change in the field of the 
sciences, and the loss of its fancied possessions which specula- 

B xxxii. tive reason must suffer, general human interests remain in the 
same privileged position as hitherto, and the advantages which 
the world has hitherto derived from the teachings of pure 
reason are in no way diminished. The loss affects only the 
monopoly of the schools, in no respect the interests of humanity. 
I appeal to the most rigid dogmatist, whether the proof of the 
continued existence of our soul after death, derived from the 
simplicity of substance, or of the freedom of the will as opposed 
to a universal mechanism, arrived at through the subtle but 
ineffectual distinctions between subjective and objective prac- 
tical necessity, or of the existence of God as deduced from the 
concept of an ens realissimum (of the contingency of the 
changeable and of the necessity of a prime mover), have ever, 
upon passing out from the schools, succeeded in reaching the 
public mind or in exercising the slightest influence on its con- 



PREFACE TO SECOND EDITION 31 

victions? That has never been found to occur, and in view of 
the unfitness of the common human understanding for such 
subtle speculation, ought never to have been expected. Such 
widely held convictions, so far as they rest on rational grounds, 
are due to quite othejr considerations. The hope of &amp; future life 
has its source in that notable characteristic of our nature, 
never to be capable of being satisfied by what is temporal (as 
insufficient for the capacities of its whole destination); the 
consciousness of freedom rests exclusively on the clear ex- B xxxiii. 
hibition of duties, in opposition to all claims of the inclina- 
tions; the belief in a wise and great Author of the world is 
generated solely by the glorious order, beauty, and providen- 
tial care everywhere displayed in nature. When the schools 
have been brought to recognise that they can lay no claim 
to higher and fuller insight in a matter of universal human 
concern than that which is equally within the reach of the 
great mass of men (ever to be held by us in the highest 
esteem), and that, as Schools of philosophy, they should limit 
themselves to the study of those universally comprehensible, 
and, for moral purposes, sufficient grounds of proof, then 
not only do these latter possessions remain undisturbed, but 
through this very fact they acquire yet greater authority. The 
change affects only the arrogant pretensions of the Schools, 
which would fain be counted the sole authors and possessors 
of such truths (as, indeed, they can justly claim to be in many 
other branches of knowledge), reserving the key to themselves, 
and communicating to the public their use only quod mecum 
nescit, solus vult scire videri. At the same time due regard is 
paid to the more moderate claims of the speculative philosopher. B xxxiv. 
He still remains the sole authority in regard to a science which 
benefits the public without their knowing it, namely, the critique 
of reason. That critique can never become popular, and indeed 
there is no need that it should. For just as fine-spun arguments 
in favour of useful truths make no appeal to the general mind, 
so neither do the subtle objections that can be raised against 
them. On the other hand, both inevitably present themselves 
to everyone who rises to the height of speculation; and it is 
therefore the duty of the Schools, by means of a thorough 
investigation of the rights of speculative reason, once for all 
to prevent the scandal which, sooner or later, is sure to 



32 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

break out even among the masses, as the result of the 
disputes in which metaphysicians (and, as such, finally also 
the clergy) inevitably become involved to the consequent 
perversion of their teaching. Criticism alone can sever the 
root of materialism, fatalism, atheism, free-thinking, fanati- 
cism, and superstition, which can be injurious universally; as 
well as of idealism and scepticism, which are dangerous chiefly 
to the Schools, and hardly allow of being handed on to the 

B xxxv. public. If governments think proper to interfere with the 
affairs of the learned, it would be more consistent with a wise 
regard for science as well as for mankind, to favour the free- 
dom of such criticism, by which alone the labours of reason 
can be established on a firm basis, than to support the 
ridiculous despotism of the Schools, which raise a loud cry of 
public danger over the destruction of cobwebs to which the 
public has never paid any attention, and the loss of which it 
can therefore never feel. 

This critique is not opposed to the dogmatic procedure of 
reason in its pure knowledge, as science, for that must always 
be dogmatic, that is, yield strict proof from sure principles 
a priori. It is opposed only to dogmatism, that is, to the pre- 
sumption that it is possible to make progress with pure know- 
ledge, according to principles, from concepts alone (those that 
are philosophical), as reason has long been in the habit of 
doing; and that it is possible to do this without having first in- 
vestigated in what way and by what right reason has come into 
possession of these concepts. Dogmatism is thus the dogmatic 
procedure of pure reason, without previous criticism of its own 
powers. I n withstanding dogmatism we must not allow ourselves 
to give free rein to that loquacious shallowness, which assumes 

B xxxvi. for itself the name of popularity, nor yet to scepticism, which 
makes short work with all metaphysics. On the contrary, such 
criticism is the necessary preparation for a thoroughly grounded 
metaphysics, which, as science, must necessarily be developed 
dogmatically, according to the strictest demands of system, 
in such manner as to satisfy not the general public but the re- 
quirements of the Schools. For that is a demand to which it 
stands pledged, and which it may not neglect, namely, that it 
carry out its work entirely a priori, to the complete satisfaction 
of speculative reason. In the execution of the plan prescribed 



PREFACE TO SECOND EDITION 33 

by the critique, that is, in the future system of metaphysics, 
we have therefore to follow the strict method of the celebrated 
Wolff, the greatest of all the dogmatic philosophers. He was 
the first to show by example (and by his example he awakened 
that spirit of thoroughness which is not extinct in Germany) 
how the secure progress of a science is to be attained only 
through orderly establishment of principles, clear determina- 
tion of concepts, insistence upon strictness of proof, and avoid- 
ance of venturesome, non-consecutive steps in our inferences. 
He was thus peculiarly well fitted to raise metaphysics to the 
dignity of a science, if only it had occurred to him to prepare 
the ground beforehand by a critique of the organ, that is, of 
pure reason itself. The blame for his having failed to do so B xxxvii. 
lies not so much with himself as with the dogmatic way 
of thinking prevalent in his day, and with which the philo- 
sophers of his time, and of all previous times, have no right 
to reproach one another. Those who reject both the method 
of Wolff and the procedure of a critique of pure reason can 
have no other aim than to shake off the fetters of science 
altogether, and thus to change work into play, certainty into 
opinion, philosophy into philodoxy. 

Now, as regards this second edition^ I have, as is fitting, 
endeavoured to profit by the opportunity, in order to remove, 
wherever possible, difficulties and obscurity which, not per- 
haps without my fault, may have given rise to the many 
misunderstandings into which even acute thinkers have fallen 
in passing judgment upon my book. In the propositions them- 
selves and their proofs, and also in the form and completeness 
of the [architectonic] plan, I have found nothing to alter. This 
is due partly to the long examination to which I have sub- 
jected them, before offering them l to the public, partly to the 
nature of the subject-matter with which we are dealing. For 
pure speculative reason has a structure wherein everything 
is an organ, the whole being for the sake of every part, and 
every part for the sake of all the others, so that even the B xxxviii. 
smallest imperfection, be it a fault (error) or a deficiency, must 
inevitably betray itself in use. This system will, as I hope, 
maintain, throughout the future, this unchangeableness. It 
is not self-conceit which justifies me in this confidence, but 

1 [Reading, with Erdmann, sie for es.} 

D 



34 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

the evidence experimentally obtained through the parity of 
the result, whether we proceed from the smallest elements 
to the whole of pure reason or reverse-wise from the whole 
(for this also is presented to reason through its final end 
in the sphere of the practical) to each part. Any attempt to 
change even the smallest part at once gives rise to contradic- 
tions, not merely in the system, but in human reason in 
general. As to the mode of exposition, on the other hand, 
much still remains to be done; and in this edition I have 
sought to make improvements which should help in removing, 
first, the misunderstanding in regard to the Aesthetic, especi- 
ally concerning the concept of time; secondly, the obscurity 
of the deduction of the concepts of understanding; thirdly, a 
supposed want of sufficient evidence in the proofs of the prin- 
ciples of pure understanding; and finally, the false interpreta- 
tion placed upon the paralogisms charged against rational 
psychology. Beyond this point, that is, beyond the end of the 
B xxxix. first chapter of the Transcendental Dialectic, I have made no 
B xl. changes in the mode of exposition. Time was too short to 

The only addition, strictly so called, though one affecting the 
method of proof only, is the new refutation of psychological idealism 
(cf. below, p. 244), and a strict (also, as I believe, the only possible) 
proof of the objective reality of outer intuition. However harmless 
idealism may be considered in respect of the essential aims of meta- 
physics (though, in fact, it is not thus harmless), it still remains a 
scandal to philosophy and to human reason in general that the 
existence of things outside us (from which we derive the whole 
material of knowledge, even for our inner sense) must be accepted 
merely on. faith, and that if anyone thinks good to doubt their exist- 
ence, we are unable to counter his doubts by any satisfactory proof. 
Since there is some obscurity in the expressions used in the proof, 
from the third line to the sixth line, I beg to alter the passage as 
follows: "But this permanent cannot be an intuition in me. For all 
grounds of determination of my existence which are to be met with 
in me are representations; and as representations themselves require a 
permanent distinct from them, in relation to which their change, 
and so my existence in the time wherein they change, may be deter- 
mined" To this proof it will probably be objected, that I am im- 
mediately conscious only of that which is in me, that is, of my repre- 
sentation of outer things; and consequently that it must still remain 
uncertain whether outside me there is anything corresponding to it, 
B xl. or not. But through inner experience I am conscious of my existence 



PREFACE TO SECOND EDITION 35 

allow of further changes; and besides, I have not found among B xli. 
competent and impartial critics any misapprehension in regard 
to the remaining sections. Though I shall not venture to name 
these critics with the praise that is their due, the attention B xlii. 
which I have paid to their comments will easily be recognised 
in the [new] passages [above mentioned] . These improvements 
involve, however, a small loss, not to be prevented save by 
making the book too voluminous, namely, that I have had 
to omit or abridge certain passages, which, though not 
indeed essential to the completeness of the whole, may yet 
be missed by many readers as otherwise helpful. Only so 
could I obtain space for what, as I hope, is now a more 
intelligible exposition, which, though altering absolutely 
nothing in the fundamentals of the propositions put for- 
ward or even in their proofs, yet here and there departs 
so far from the previous method of treatment, that mere in- 
terpolations could not be made to suffice. This loss, which is 
small and can be remedied by consulting the first edition, will, 
I hope, be compensated by the greater clearness of the new 

in tfme (consequently also of its determinability in time), and this is 
more than to be conscious merely of my representation. It is identical 
with the empirical consciousness of my existence ', which is determin- 
able only through relation to something which, while bound up with 
my existence, is outside me. This consciousness of my existence in 
time is bound up in the way of identity x with the consciousness of a 
relation to something outside me, and it is therefore experience not 
invention, sense not imagination, which inseparably connects this 
outside something with my inner sense. For outer sense is already 
in itself a relation of intuition to something actual outside me, and 
the reality of outer sense, in its distinction from imagination, rests 
simply on that which is here found to take place, namely, its being 
inseparably bound up with inner experience, as the condition of its 
possibi^ty. If, with the intellectual consciousness of my existence, in 
the representation ( I am', which accompanies all my judgments and 
acts of understanding, I could at the same time connect a determina- 
tion of my existence through intellectual intuition, the conscious- 
ness of a relation to something outside me would not be required. 
But though that intellectual consciousness does indeed come first, 2 
the inner intuition, in which my existence can alone be determined, 
is sensible and is bound up with the condition of time. This deter- 
mination, however, and therefore the inner experience itself, depends 

1 \identisch vcrbunden.} 8 [vorangeht.} 



36 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

text. I have observed, with pleasure and thankfulness, in 
various published works alike in critical reviews and in in- 
dependent treatises that the spirit of thoroughness is not 
extinct in Germany, but has only been temporarily over- 
B xliii. shadowed by the prevalence of a pretentiously free manner of 
thinking; and that the thorny paths of the Critique have not 
discouraged courageous and clear heads from setting them- 
selves to master my book a work which leads to a method- 
ical, and as such alone enduring, and therefore most necessary, 
science of pure reason. To these worthy men, who so happily 
combine thoroughness of insight with a talent for lucid ex- 
position which I cannot regard myself as possessing I 
leave the task of perfecting what, here and there, in its 
exposition, is still somewhat defective; for in this regard 
the danger is not that of being refuted, but of not being 

upon something permanent which is not in me, and consequently 
B xli. can be only in something outside me, to which I must regard my- 
self as standing in relation. The reality of outer sense is thus neces- 
sarily bound up with inner sense, if experience in general is to be 
possible at all; that is, I am just as certainly conscious that there are 
things outside me, which are in relation to my sense, as I am con- 
scious that I myself exist as determined in time. In order to deter- 
mine to which given intuitions objects outside me actually corre- 
spond, and which therefore belong to outer sense (to which, and not 
to the faculty of imagination, they are to be ascribed), we must in 
each single case appeal to the rules according to which experience 
in general, even inner experience, is distinguished from imagination 
the proposition that there is such a thing as outer experience being 
always presupposed. This further remark may be added. The repre- 
sentation of something permanent in existence is not the same as 
permanent representation. For though the representation of [some- 
thing permanent] * may be very transitory and variable like all our 
other representations, not excepting those of matter, it yet refers to 
something permanent. This latter must therefore be an external 
thing distinct from all my representations, and its existence must be 
included in the determination of my own existence, constituting with 
it but a single experience such as would not take place even inwardly 
if it were not also at the same time, in part, outer. How this should 
be possible we are as little capable of explaining further as we are of 
accounting for our being able to think the abiding in time, the co- 
existence of which with the changing generates the concept of altera- 
tion. 

1 [Reading, with Wille,/V#&lt;? for diese.] 



PREFACE TO SECOND EDITION 37 

understood. From now on, though I cannot allow myself to 
enter into controversy, I shall take careful note of all sugges- 
tions, be they" from friends or from opponents, for use, in 
accordance with this propaedeutic, in the further elaboration 
of the system. In thecourse of these labours I have advanced 
somewhat far in years (this month I reach my sixty-fourth 
year), and I must be careful with my time if I am to succeed 
in my proposed scheme of providing a metaphysic of nature 
and of morals which will confirm the truth of my Critique in 
the two fields, of speculative and of practical reason. The 
clearing up of the obscurities in the present work they are B xliv. 
hardly to be avoided in a new enterprise and the defence 
of it as a whole, I must therefore leave to those worthy men 
who have made my teaching their own. A philosophical work 
cannot be armed at all points, like a mathematical treatise, 
and may therefore be open to objection in this or that respect, 
while yet the structure of the system, taken in its unity, is not 
in the least endangered. Few have the versatility of mind to 
familiarise themselves with a new system; and owing to the 
general distaste for all innovation, still fewer have the inclina- 
tion to do so. If we take single passages, torn from their 
contexts, and compare them with one another, apparent con- 
tradictions are not likely to be lacking, especially in a work 
that is written with any freedom of expression. In the eyes of 
those who rely on the judgment of others, such contradic- 
tions have the effect of placing the work in an unfavourable 
light; but they are easily resolved by those who have mastered 
the idea of the whole. If a theory has in itself stability, the 
stresses and strains which may at first have seemed very 
threatening to it serve only, in the course of time, to smooth 
away its inequalities; and if men of impartiality, insight, and 
true popularity devote themselves to its exposition, it may also, 
in a short time, secure for itself the necessary elegance of 
statement. 

KONIGSBERG, April 1787. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 1 



PAGE 



INTRODUCTION ....... 41 

I. TRANSCENDENTAL DOCTRINE OF ELEMENTS . . .63 
Part I. Transcendental Aesthetic . . . .65 

Section I. Space . . . . . -67 

Section 2. Time . . . . . .74 

Part II. Transcendental Logic . . . . -9? 

Division I. Transcendental Analytic in two books and their 

various chapters and sections .... 102 

Division II. Transcendental Dialectic in two books and their 


various chapters and sections .... 297 

II. TRANSCENDENTAL DOCTRINE OF METHOD . . . 571 Axxiv. 

Chapter I. The Discipline of Pure Reason . . -574 

Chapter II. The Canon of Pure Reason . . . 629 

Chapter III. The Architectonic of Pure Reason . -653 

Chapter IV. The History of Pure Reason . . . 666 



1 [This is the table of contents in A. The table of contents in B is, with minor 
changes, given above, pp. ix-xiii.] 

39 



INTRODUCTION B, 

[. THE DISTINCTION BETWEEN PURE AND EMPIRICAL 
KNOWLEDGE 

THERE can be no doubt that all our knowledge begins with 
experience. For how should our faculty of knowledge be 
awakened into action did not objects affecting our senses 
partly of themselves produce representations, partly arouse 
the activity of our understanding to compare these repre- 
sentations, and, by combining or separating them, work 
up the raw material of the sensible impressions into that 
knowledge of objects which is entitled experience? In the 
orcjer of time, therefore, we have no knowledge antecedent to 
experience, and with experience all our knowledge begins. 

But though all our knowledge begins with experience, 
it does not follow that it all arises out of experience. For it 

* [In B the Introduction is divided into five sections, in place of 
the two sections of the original Introduction. The new sections I. 
and II. (with their headings) are substituted in B for the original 
two opening paragraphs (with their heading), which are as follows:] 

I. THE IDEA OF TRANSCENDENTAL PHILOSOPHY A i 

Experience is, beyond all doubt, the first product to which 
our understanding gives rise, in working up the raw material 
of sensible impressions. 1 Experience is therefore our first 
instruction, and in its progress is so inexhaustible in new 
information, that in the interconnected lives of all future 
generations there will never be any lack of new knowledge 
that can be thus ingathered. Nevertheless, it is by no means 

1 \sinnliche Empfindungen^ 
41 



42 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

may well be that even our empirical knowledge is made up of 
what we receive through impressions and of what our own 
faculty of knowledge (sensible impressions serving merely as 
the occasion) supplies from itself. If our faculty of knowledge 
makes any such addition, it may be that we are not in a posi- 
B 2 tion to distinguish it from the raw material, until with long 
practice of attention we have become skilled in separating it. 
This, then, is a question which at least calls for closer 
examination, and does not allow of any off-hand answer: 
whether there is any knowledge that is thus independent of 
experience and even of all impressions of the senses. Such 
knowledge is entitled a priori, and distinguished from the 

the sole field to which our understanding is confined. Experi- 
ence tells us, indeed, what is, but not that it must necessarily 
be so, and not otherwise. It therefore gives us no true 
universality; and reason, which is so insistent upon this 
A 2 kind of knowledge, is therefore more stimulated by it than 
satisfied. Such universal modes of knowledge, 1 which at the 
same time possess the character of inner necessity, must in 
themselves, independently of experience, be clear and certajn. 
They are therefore entitled knowledge a priori] whereas, on 
the other hand, that which is borrowed solely from experience 
is, as we say, known only a posteriori, or empirically. 

Now we find, what is especially noteworthy, that even into 
our experiences there enter modes of knowledge which must 
have their origin a priori, and which perhaps serve only to 
give coherence to our sense-representations. 2 For if we elimin- 
ate from our experiences everything which belongs to the 
senses, there still remain certain original concepts and certain 
judgments derived from them, which must have arisen com- 
pletely a priori, independently of experience, inasmuch as 
they enable us to say, or at least lead us to believe that we can 
say, in regard to the objects which appear to the senses, more 
than mere experience would teach giving to assertions true 
universality and strict necessity, such as mere empirical know- 
ledge cannot supply. 

1 [As the term 'knowledge* cannot be used in the plural, I have usually trans- 
lated Erkenntnisse 'modes of knowledge'.] 
1 [ Vorstellungen der Sinne.] 



INTRODUCTION 43 

empirical^ which has its sources a posteriori ', that is, in experi- 
ence. 

The expression l a prior? does not, however, indicate with 
sufficient precision the full meaning of our question. For it 
has been customary to say, even of much knowledge that is 
derived from empirical sources, that we have it or are capable 
of having it a priori, meaning thereby that we do not derive 
it immediately from experience, but from a universal rule a 
rule which is itself, however, borrowed by us from experience. 
Thus we would say of a man who undermined the foundations 
of his house, that he might have known a priori that it would 
fall, that is, that he need not have waited for the experience of 
its actual falling. But still he could not know this completely 
a priori. For he had first to learn through experience that 
bodies are heavy, and therefore fall when their supports are 
withdrawn. 

In what follows, therefore, we shall understand by a priori 
knowledge, not knowledge independent of this or that experi- 
ence, but knowledge absolutely independent of all experience. B 3 
Opposed to it is empirical knowledge, which is knowledge 
possible only a posteriori, that is, through experience. A 
priori modes of knowledge are entitled pure when there is 
no admixture of anything empirical. Thus, for instance, the 
proposition, 'every alteration has its cause', while an a priori 
proposition, is not a pure proposition, because alteration is a 
concept which can be derived only from experience. 1 

II. WE ARE IN POSSESSION OF CERTAIN MODES OF A PRIORI 
KNOWLEDGE, AND EVEN THE COMMON UNDERSTAND- 
ING IS NEVER WITHOUT THEM 

What we here require is a criterion 2 by which to distinguish 
with certainty between pure and empirical knowledge. Ex- 
perience teaches us that a thing is so and so, but not that it 
cannot be otherwise. First, then, if we have a proposition 
which in being thought is thought as necessary, it is an a priori 
judgment; and if, besides, it is not derived from any proposi- 
tion except one which also has the validity of a necessary 
judgment, it is an absolutely a priori judgment. Secondly, 

1 [Cf. below, pp. 44, 76, 216-7.] * [Merkmal.] 



44 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

experience never confers on its judgments true or strict, but 
only assumed and comparative universality, through induc- 
tion. We can properly only say, .therefore, that, so far as 

64 we have hitherto observed, there is no exception to this or 
that rule. If, then, a judgment is thought with strict univer- 
sality, that is, in such manner that no exception is allowed as 
possible, it is not derived from experience, but is valid abso- 
lutely a priori. Empirical universality is only an arbitrary ex- 
tension of a validity holding in most cases to one which holds 
in all, for instance, in the proposition, 'all bodies are heavy'. 
When, on the other hand, strict universality is essential to a 
a judgment, this indicates a special source of knowledge, 
namely, a faculty of a priori knowledge. Necessity and strict 
universality are thus sure criteria of a priori knowledge, and 
are inseparable from one another. But since in the employ- 
ment of these criteria the contingency of judgments is some- 
times more easily shown than their empirical limitation, 1 or, 
as sometimes also happens, their unlimited universality can 
be more convincingly proved than their necessity, it is advis- 
able to use the two criteria separately, each by itself being 
infallible. 

Now it is easy to show that there actually are in human 
knowledge judgments which are necessary and in the strictest 
sense universal, and which are therefore pure a priori judg- 
ments. If an example from the sciences be desired, we have 
only to look to any of the propositions of mathematics; if we 
seek an example from the understanding in its quite ordinary 

B 5 employment, the proposition, 'every alteration must have a 
cause', will serve our purpose. In the latter case, indeed, the 
very concept of a cause so manifestly contains the concept of 
a necessity of connection with an effect and of the strict uni- 
versality of the rule, that the concept would be altogetherjost if 
we attempted to derive it, as Hume has done, from a repeated 
association of that which happens with that which precedes, 
and from a custom of connecting representations, a custom 
originating in this repeated association, and constituting 
therefore a merely subjective necessity. Even without appeal- 

1 [Reading, with Vaihinger, die Zufdlligkeit in den Urteilen als die empirische 
Beschrdnktheit derselben for die empirische Beschrdnktheit derselben ah die 
Zufalligkeit in den Urteilen .] 



INTRODUCTION 45 

ing to such examples, it is possible to show that pure a priori 
principles are indispensable for the possibility of experience, 
and so to prove their existence a priori. For whence could 
experience derive its certainty, if all the rules, according to 
which it proceeds, were always themselves empirical, and 
therefore contingent? Such rules could hardly be regarded as 
first principles. At present, however, we may be content to 
have established the fact that our faculty of knowledge does 
have a pure employment, and to have shown what are the 
criteria of such an employment. 

Such a priori origin is manifest in certain concepts, no 
less than in judgments. If we remove from our empirical 
concept of a body, one by one, every feature in it which is 
[merely] empirical, the colour, the hardness or softness, the 
weight, even 1 the impenetrability, there still remains the 
space which the body (now entirely vanished) occupied, and 
this cannot be removed. Again, if we remove from our em- B 6 
pirical concept of any object, corporeal or incorporeal, all 
properties which experience has taught us, we yet cannot take 
away that property through which the object is thought as 
substance or as inhering in a substance (although this concept 
of substance is more determinate than that of an object in 
general). Owing, therefore, to the necessity with which this 
concept of substance forces itself upon us, we have no option 
save to admit that it has its seat in our faculty of a priori 
knowledge. 

III. PHILOSOPHY STANDS IN NEED OF A SCIENCE WHICH 
SHALL DETERMINE THE POSSIBILITY, THE PRINCIPLES, 
AND THE EXTENT OF ALL A PRIORI KNOWLEDGE 

But what is still more extraordinary than all the preceding 2 
is this, that certain modes of knowledge leave the field of all 
possible experiences and have the appearance of extending A 3 
the scope of our judgments beyond all limits of experience, 
and this by means of concepts to which no corresponding 
object can ever be given in experience. 

It is precisely by means of the latter modes of knowledge, 
in a realm beyond the world of the senses, where experience 
1 [selbst omitted in the 4th edition.] a [ats alh -vorige added in B.] 



46 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

can yield neither guidance nor correction, that our reason 
carries on those enquiries which owing to their importance 
B 7 we consider to be far more excellent, and in -their purpose 
far more lofty, than all that the understanding can learn in 
the field of appearances. Indeed we prefer to run every risk 
of error rather than desist from such urgent enquiries, on the 
ground of their dubious character, or from disdain and in- 
difference. 1 These unavoidable problems set by pure reason 
itself are God, freedom, and immortality. The science which, 
with all its preparations, is in its final intention directed 
solely to their solution is metaphysics ; and its procedure 
is at first dogmatic, that is, it confidently sets itself to this 
task without any previous examination of the capacity or 
incapacity of reason for so great an undertaking. 

Now it does indeed seem natural that, as soon as we have 
left the ground of experience, we should, through careful en- 
quiries, assure ourselves as to the foundations of any building 
that we propose to erect, not making use of any knowledge 
that we possess without first determining whence it has come, 
and not trusting to principles without knowing their origin. 
It is natural, that is to say, that the question should first.be 
considered, how the understanding can arrive at all this know- 
ledge a priori, and what extent, validity, and worth it may 
A 4 have. Nothing, indeed, could be more natural, if by the term 
B 8 'natural' a we signify what fittingly and reasonably ought to 
happen. But if we mean by 'natural' what ordinarily happens, 
then on the contrary nothing is more natural and more in- 
telligible than the fact that this enquiry has been so long neg- 
lected. For one part of this knowledge, the mathematical, has 
long been of established reliability, and so gives rise to a favour- 
able presumption as regards the other part, which may yet be of 
quite different nature. Besides, once we are outside the circle 
of experience, we can be sure of not being contradicted by 
experience. The charm of extending our knowledge is so 
great that nothing short of encountering a direct contra- 
diction can suffice to arrest us in our course; and this can be 
avoided, if we are careful in our fabrications which none the 
less will still remain fabrications. Mathematics gives us a shin- 

1 ["These unavoidable . . ." to end of paragraph added in B.] 
* [In A unter diesem Wort: in B unter dem Worte natiirlich.] 



INTRODUCTION 47 

ing example of how far, independently of experience, we can 
progress in a priori knowledge. It does, indeed, occupy itself 
with objects and with knowledge solely in so far as they allow 
of being exhibited in intuition. But this circumstance is easily 
overlooked, since theintuition, in being thought, can itself be 
given a priori^ and is therefore hardly to be distinguished from 
a bare and pure concept. Misled 1 by such a proof of the power 
of reason, the demand for the extension of knowledge recog- A 5 
nises no limits. The light dove, cleaving the air in her free 
flight, and feeling its resistance, might imagine that its flight 
would be still easier in empty space. It was thus that Plato B 9 
left the world of the senses, as setting too narrow limits to a 
the understanding, and ventured out beyond it on the wings 
of the ideas, in the empty space of the pure understanding. 
He did not observe that with all his efforts he made no ad- 
vance meeting no resistance that might, as it were, serve 
as a support upon which he could take a stand, to which 
he could apply his powers, and so set his understanding 
in motion. It is, indeed, the common fate of human reason 
to complete its speculative structures as speedily as may 
be, and only afterwards to enquire whether the foundations 
are reliable. All sorts of excuses will then be appealed to, in 
order to reassure us of their solidity, or rather indeed 8 to 
enable us to dispense altogether with so late and so dangerous 
an enquiry. But what keeps us, during the actual building, 
free from all apprehension and suspicion, and flatters us with 
a seeming thoroughness, is this other circumstance, namely, 
that a great, perhaps the greatest, part of the business of our 
reason consists in analysis 4 of the concepts which we already 
have of objects. This analysis supplies us with a consider- 
able body of knowledge, which, while nothing but explanation 
or elucidation of what has already been thought in our con- A 6 
cepts, though in a confused manner, is yet prized as being, 
at least as regards its form, new insight. But so far as the 
matter or content is concerned, there has been no extension of 
our previously possessed concepts, but only an analysis of them. 
Since this procedure yields real knowledge a priori^ which B 10 

1 [In A: Encouraged.] 

* [In A: placing such manifold hindrances in the way of.] 

3 \lieber gar added in B.] 

4 [Reading, with the 5th edition. Zerghedcrung for Zergliederungen\ 



48 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

progresses in an assured and useful fashion, reason is so far 
misled as surreptitiously to introduce, without itself being 
aware of so doing, assertions of an entirely different order, in 
which it attaches to given concepts others completely foreign 
to them, and moreover attaches them a priori .* And yet it is 
not known how reason can be in position to do this. Such a 
question 2 is never so much as thought of. I shall therefore 
at once proceed to deal with the difference between these two 
kinds of knowledge. 



3 IV. THE DISTINCTION BETWEEN ANALYTIC AND 
SYNTHETIC JUDGMENTS 

In all judgments in which the relation of a subject to the 
predicate is thought (I take into consideration affirmative 
judgments only, the subsequent 4 application to negative judg- 
ments being easily made), this relation is possible in two 
different ways. Either the predicate B belongs to the subject 
A, as something which is (covertly) contained in this concept 
A; or B lies outside the concept A, although it does indeed 
stand in connection with it. In the one case I entitle the judg- 

A 7 ment analytic, in the other synthetic. Analytic judgments 
(affirmative) are therefore those in which the connection of the 
predicate with the subject is thought through identity; those 
in which this connection is thought without identity should 

B ii be entitled synthetic. The former, as adding nothing through 
the predicate to the concept of the subject, but merely break- 
ing it up into those constituent concepts that have all along 
been thought in it, although confusedly, can also be entitled 
explicative. The latter, on the other hand, add to the concept 
of the subject a predicate which has not been in any wise thought 
in it, and which no analysis could possibly extract from it; and 
they may therefore be entitled ampliative. If I say, for instance, 
'All bodies are extended*, this is an analytic judgment. For I 
do not require to go beyond the concept which I connect with 
'body* 6 in order to find extension as bound up with it. To 

1 [In A: attaches a priori to given concepts others completely foreign to 
them.] 

1 [In A: This question.] * ["IV" added in B.] * \nachher added in B.] 
8 [In A: outside the concept which I connect with the word body.] 



INTRODUCTION 49 

meet with this predicate, I have merely to analyse the concept, 
that is, to become conscious to myself x of the manifold which 
I always thinjk in that concept. The judgment is therefore 
analytic. But when I say, 'All bodies are heavy', the predi- 
cate is something qujte different from anything that I think in 
the mere concept of body in general; and the addition of such 
a predicate therefore yields a synthetic judgment. 

* Judgments of experience?, as such, are one and all synthetic. 
For it would be absurd to found an analytic judgment on ex- 
perience. Since, in framing the judgment, I must not go out- 
side my concept, there is no need to appeal to the testimony 
of experience in its support. That a body is extended is a pro- 
position that holds a priori and is not empirical. For, before B 12 
appealing to experience, I have already in the concept of body 

all the conditions required for my judgment. I have only to ex- 
tract from it, in accordance with the principle of contradiction, 
the required predicate, and in so doing can at the same time 
become conscious of the necessity of the judgment and that 
is what experience could never have taught me. On the other 
hand, though I do not include in the concept of a body in 
general the predicate 'weight', none the less this concept indi- 
cates an object of experience through one of its parts, and I 
can add to that part other parts of this same experience, as in 
this way belonging together with the concept. From the start 

* ["Judgments of experience" to end of paragraph substituted in 
B in place of the following:] 

Thus it is evident: i. that through analytic judgments our 
knowledge is not in any way extended, and that the concept A 8 
which I already have is merely set forth and made intelligible 
to me; 2. that in synthetic judgments I must have besides the 
concept of the subject something else (X), upon which the un- 
derstanding may rely, if it is to know that a predicate, not 
contained in this concept, nevertheless belongs to it. 

In the case of empirical judgments, judgments of experi- 
ence, there is no difficulty whatsoever in meeting this demand. 
This X is the complete experience of the object which I think 
through the concept A a concept which forms only one part 
of this experience. For though I do not include in the concept 

1 \mir added in B.] 



So KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

I can apprehend the concept of body analytically through the 
characters of extension, impenetrability, figure, etc., all of 
which are thought in the concept. Now, however, looking 
back on the experience from which I have derived this con- 
cept of body, and finding weight to be invariably connected 
with the above characters, I attach it as a predicate to the 
concept; and in doing so I attach it synthetically, and am 
therefore extending my knowledge. The possibility of the syn- 
thesis of the predicate 'weight' with the concept of 'body' thus 
rests upon experience. While the one concept is not contained 
in the other, they yet belong to one another, though only con- 
tingently, as parts of a whole, namely, of an experience which 
is itself a synthetic combination of intuitions. 
A 9 But in a priori synthetic judgments this help is entirely 
B 13 lacking. [I do not here have the advantage of looking around 
in the field of experience.] Upon what, then, am I to rely, when 
I seek to go beyond * the concept A, and to know that another 
concept B is connected with it? Through what is the syn- 
thesis made possible? Let us take the proposition, 'Every- 
thing which happens has its cause'. In the concept of 'some- 
thing which happens', I do indeed think an existence which is 
preceded by a time, etc., and from this concept analytic judg- 
ments may be obtained. But the concept of a 'cause' lies entirely 
outside the other concept, and 2 signifies something different 

of a body in general the predicate 'weight', the concept none 
the less indicates the complete experience through one of its 
parts; and to this part, as belonging to it, I can therefore add 
other parts of the same experience. By prior analysis I can ap- 
prehend the concept of body through the characters of exten- 
sion, impenetrability, figure, etc., all of which are thought in 
this concept. To extend my knowledge, I then look back to the 
experience from which I have derived this concept of body, and 
find that weight is always connected with the above characters. 
Experience is thus the X which lies outside the concept A, 
and on which rests the possibility of the synthesis of the 
predicate 'weight' (B) with the concept (A). 

1 [In A: outside.] 
1 \liegt ganz ausser jenem Begriffe, und added in B.] 



INTRODUCTION 51 

from 'that which happens', and is not therefore 1 in any way 
contained in this latter representation. How come I then to 
predicate of that which happens something quite different, 
and to apprehend that the concept of cause, though not con- 
tained in it, yet belongs, and indeed necessarily belongs, 2 to it? 
What is here the unknown 8 = X which gives support to the 
understanding when it believes that it can discover outside 
the concept A a predicate B foreign to this concept, which 
it yet at the same time considers to be connected with it? 4 
It cannot be experience, because the suggested principle has 
connected the second representation 5 with the first, not only 
with greater universality, 8 but also with the character of 
necessity, and therefore completely a priori and on the basis 
of mere concepts. Upon such synthetic, that is, ampliative 
principles, all our a priori speculative knowledge must ulti- A 10 
mately rest; analytic judgments 7 are very important, and indeed 
necessary, but only for obtaining that clearness in the con- B 14 
cepts which is requisite for such a sure and wide synthesis as 
will lead to a genuinely new addition 8 to all previous know- 
ledge.* 



* [In A there follows the passage, omitted in B:] 
A certain mystery lies here concealed; and only upon 
its solution can the advance into the limitless field of the 
knowledge yielded by pure understanding be made sure and 
trustworthy. What we must do is to discover, in all its proper 
universality, the ground of the possibility of a priori synthetic 
judgments, to obtain insight into the conditions which make 

If it had occurred to any of the ancients even to raise this 
question, this by itself would, up to our own time, have been a power- 
ful influence against all systems of pure reason, and would have 
saved us so many of those vain attempts, which have been blindly 
undertaken without knowledge of what it is that requires to be done. 

1 \ist also substituted in B for und tst.] 

* \und sogar notwendig added in B.] 

8 [das Unbekannte X substituted in B for das X.] 

4 [In A: and yet at the same time connected with it.] 

6 [Reading, with Grille, VorsUllung for Vorstellungen] 

* [In A: with greater universality than experience can yield, but . . .] 

7 [Adding, with Erdmann, Urteile.] 

8 [In B Erwerb substituted for Anbau.] 



52 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

1 V. IN ALL THEORETICAL SCIENCES OF REASON SYNTHETIC 
A PRIORI JUDGMENTS ARE CONTAINED AS PRINCIPLES 

i. All mathematical judgments } without exception , are 
synthetic. This fact, though incontes'tably certain and in 
its consequences very important, has hitherto escaped the 
notice of those who are engaged in the analysis of human 
reason, and is, indeed, directly opposed to all their conjectures. 
For as it was found that all mathematical inferences proceed 
in accordance with the principle of contradiction (which the 
nature of all apodeictic certainty requires), it was supposed that 
the fundamental propositions of the science can themselves be 
known to be true 2 through that principle. This is an erroneous 
view. For though a synthetic proposition can indeed be dis- 
cerned in accordance with the principle of contradiction, this 
can only be if another synthetic proposition is presupposed, 
and if it can then be apprehended as following from this other 
proposition; it can never be so discerned in and by itself. 

First of all, it has to be noted that mathematical proposi- 
tions, strictly so called, are always judgments a priori^ not 
empirical; because they carry with them necessity, which 
B 15 cannot be derived from experience. If this be demurred to, 
I am willing to limit my statement to pure mathematics, the 
very concept of which implies that it does not contain empirical, 
but only pure a priori knowledge. 

We might, indeed, at first suppose that the proposition 
7 + 5 183 12 is a merely analytic proposition, and follows by 
the principle of contradiction from the concept of a sum of 
7 and 5. But if we look more closely we find that the concept 
of the sum of 7 and 5 contains nothing save the union of the 
two numbers into one, and in this no thought is being taken 

each kind of such judgments possible, and to mark out all this 
knowledge, which forms a genus by itself, not in any cursory 
outline, but in a system, with completeness and in a manner 
sufficient for any use, according to its original sources, divi- 
sions, extent, and limits. So much, meantime, as regards 
what is peculiar in synthetic judgments. 

1 [Sections V. and VI. added in B.] 
1 [In 4th edition erkannt changed to ancrkannt.} 



INTRODUCTION 53 

as to what that single number may be which combines both. 
The concept of 1 2 is by no means already thought in merely 
thinking this union of 7 and 5; and I may analyse my concept 
of such a possible sum as long as I please, still I shall never 
find the 1 2 in it. We iiave to go outside these concepts, and 
call in the aid of the intuition which corresponds to one of 
them, our five fingers, for instance, or, as Segner 1 does in his 
Arithmetic, five points, adding to the concept of 7, unit by 
unit, the five given in intuition. For starting with the number 
7, and for the concept of 5 calling in the aid of the fingers of 
my hand as intuition, I now add one by one to the number 7 
the units which I previously took together to form the number B 16 
5 , and with the aid of that figure 2 [the hand] see the number 1 2 
come into being. That 5 should be added to 7, 3 I have indeed 
already thought in the concept of a sum=*7 + 5, but not that 
this sum is equivalent to the number 12. Arithmetical pro- 
positions are therefore always synthetic. This is still more 
evident if we take larger numbers. For it is then obvious that, 
however we might turn and twist our concepts, we could 
never, by the mere analysis of them, and without the aid of 
intuition, discover what [the number is that] is the sum. 

Just as little is any fundamental proposition of pure 
geometry analytic. That the straight line between two points 
is the shortest, is a synthetic proposition. For my concept of 
straight contains nothing of quantity, but only of quality. The 
concept of the shortest is wholly an addition, and cannot be 
derived, through any process of analysis, from the concept of 
the straight line. Intuition, therefore, must here be called in; 
only by its aid is the synthesis possible. What here 4 causes B 17 
us commonly to believe that the predicate of such apodeictic 
judgments is already contained in our concept, and that the 
judgment is therefore analytic, is merely the ambiguous 
character of the terms used. We are required to join in 
thought a certain predicate to a given concept, and this neces- 

1 \Anfangsgrunde der Arithmctik, translated from the Latin, second edition, 

Halle, 1773, PP- 2 7 79-] 

* [anjenem meinem Bilde.} 

9 [Reading, with Erdmann, 5 zu 7.] 

4 [As Vaihinger has pointed out (Commentary i. pp. 303-4), this passage, 
which in both A and B is made to follow "Some few fundamental propositions . . . 
exhibited in intuition", is quite obviously displaced. In the above translation the 
necessary rearrangement has been made.] 



54 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

sity is inherent in the concepts themselves. But the question is 
not what we ought to join in thought to the given concept, but 
what we actually think in it, even if only obscurely; and it is 
then manifest that, while the predicate is indeed attached 
necessarily to the concept, 1 it is so in virtue of an intuition 
which must be added to the concept, not as thought in the 
concept itself. 

B 16 Some few fundamental propositions, presupposed by the 
geometrician, are, indeed, really analytic, and rest on the 
principle of contradiction. But, as identical propositions, they 

B 17 serve only as links in the chain of method and not as prin- 
ciples; for instance, a = a\ the whole is equal to itself; or 
(a + b}&gt;a, that is, the whole is greater than its part. And even 
these propositions, though they are valid according to pure 
concepts, are only admitted in mathematics because they can 
be exhibited in intuition. 

2. Natural science (physics) contains a priori synthetic 
judgments as principles. I need cite only two such judgments: 
that in all changes of the material world the quantity of matter 
remains unchanged; and that in all communication of motion, 
action and reaction must always be equal. Both propositions, 
it is evident, are not only necessary, and therefore in their origin 

B 1 8 a priori, but also synthetic. For in the concept of matter I do 
not think its permanence, but only its presence in the space 
which it occupies. I go outside and beyond the concept of 
matter, joining to it a priori in thought something which I 
have not thought in it. The proposition is not, therefore, ana- 
lytic, but synthetic, and yet is thought a priori] and so likewise 
are the other propositions of the pure part of natural science. 

3. Metaphysics, even if we look upon it as having hitherto 
failed in all its endeavours, is yet, owing to the nature of 
human reason, a quite indispensable science, and ought to 
contain a priori synthetic knowledge. For its business is not 
merely to analyse concepts which we make for ourselves a 
priori of things, and thereby to clarify them analytically, but 
to extend our a priori knowledge. And for this purpose we 
must employ principles which add to the given concept some- 
thing that was not contained in it, and through a priori syn- 
thetic judgments venture out so far that experience is quite 

1 [Reading, with Erdm&amp;un,jenem Begrijffe foTjenfn Begrijfcn^ 



INTRODUCTION 55 

unable to follow us, as, for instance, in the proposition, that 
the world must have a first beginning, and such like. Thus 
metaphysics consists, at least in intention, entirely of a priori 
synthetic propositions. 



VI. THE GENERAL PROBLEM OF PURE REASON B 19 

Much is already gained if we can bring a number of in- 
vestigations under the formula of a single problem. For we 
not only lighten our own task, by defining it accurately, but 
make it easier for others, who would test our results, to judge 
whether or not we have succeeded in what we set out to do. 
Now the proper problem of pure reason is contained in the 
question: How are a priori synthetic judgments possible? 

That metaphysics has hitherto remained in so vacillating 
a state of uncertainty and contradiction, is entirely due to the 
fact that this problem, and perhaps even the distinction be- 
tween analytic and synthetic judgments, has never previously 
been considered. Upon the solution of this problem, or upon 
a sufficient proof that the possibility which it desires to have 
explained does in fact not exist at all, depends the success or 
failure of metaphysics. Among philosophers, David Hume 
came nearest to envisaging this problem, but still was very far 
from conceiving it with sufficient definiteness and universality. 
He occupied himself exclusively with the synthetic proposi- 
tion regarding the connection of an effect with its cause 
(principium causalitatis), and he believed himself to have B 20 
shown that such an a priori proposition is entirely impos- 
sible. If we accept his conclusions, then all that we call 
metaphysics is a mere delusion whereby we fancy ourselves to 
have rational insight into what, in actual fact, is borrowed 
solely from experience, and under the influence of custom has 
taken the illusory semblance of necessity. If he had envisaged 
our problem in all its universality, he would never have been 
guilty of this statement, so destructive of all pure philosophy. 
For he would then have recognised that, according to his own 
argument, pure mathematics, as certainly containing a priori 
synthetic propositions, would also not be possible; and from 
such an assertion his good sense would have saved him. 
In the solution of the above problem, we are at the same 



56 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

time deciding as to the possibility of the employment of pure 
reason in establishing and developing all those sciences which 
contain a theoretical a priori knowledge of objects, and have 
therefore to answer the questions: 

How is pure mathematics possible? 
How is pure science of nature possible? 

Since these sciences actually exist, it is quite proper to ask 
how they are possible; for that they must be possible is proved 
B 21 by the fact that they exist." But the poor progress which has 
hitherto been made in metaphysics, and the fact that no 
system yet propounded can, in view of the essential purpose 
of metaphysics, be said really to exist, leaves everyone suffi- 
cient ground for doubting as to its possibility. 

Yet, in a certain sense, this kind of knowledge is to be 
looked upon as given; that is to say, metaphysics actually 
exists, if not as a science, yet still as natural disposition (meta- 
physica naturalis). For human reason, without being moved 
merely by the idle desire for extent and variety of knowledge, 
proceeds impetuously, driven on by an inward need, to ques- 
tions such as cannot be answered by any empirical employ- 
ment of reason, or by principles thence derived. Thus in all 
men, as soon as their reason has become ripe for speculation, 
there has always existed and will always continue to exist 
some kind of metaphysics. And so we have the question: 

B 22 How is metaphysics &gt; as natural disposition^ possible? 

that is, how from the nature of universal human reason do 
those questions arise which pure reason propounds to itself, 
and which it is impelled by its own need to answer as best it 
can? 

But since all attempts which have hitherto been made 
to answer these natural questions for instance, whether the 

Many may still have doubts as regards pure natural science. 
We have only, however, to consider the various propositions that are 
to be found at the beginning of (empirical) physics, properly so 
called, those, for instance, relating to the permanence in the quantity 
of matter, to inertia, to the equality of action and reaction, etc., in 
order to be soon convinced that they constitute a physica pura, or 
rationalist which well deserves, as an independent science, to be 
separately dealt with in its whole extent, be that narrow or wide. 



INTRODUCTION 57 

world has a beginning or is from eternity have always met 
with unavoidable contradictions, we cannot rest satisfied with 
the mere natural disposition to metaphysics, that is, with the 
pure faculty of reason itself, from which, indeed, some sort of 
metaphysics (be it what it may) always arises. It must be 
possible for reason to attain to certainty whether we know or 
do not know the objects of metaphysics, that is, to come to 
a decision either in regard to the objects of its enquiries or in 
regard to the capacity or incapacity of reason to pass any 
judgment upon them, so that we may either with confidence 
extend our pure reason or set to it sure and determinate 
limits. This last question, which arises out of the previous 
general problem, may, rightly stated, take the form: 

How is metaphysics, as science, possible? 

Thus the critique of reason, in the end, necessarily leads to 
scientific knowledge; while its dogmatic employment, on the 
other hand, lands us in dogmatic assertions to which other B 23 
assertions, equally specious, can always be opposed that is, 
in scepticism. 

This science cannot be of any very formidable prolixity, 
since it has to deal not with the objects of reason, the variety 
of which is inexhaustible, but only with itself and the prob- 
lems which arise entirely from within itself, and which are 
imposed upon it by its own nature, not by the nature of things 
which are distinct from it. When once reason has learnt com- 
pletely to understand its own power in respect of objects which 
can be presented to it in experience, it should easily be able to 
determine, with completeness and certainty, the extent and 
the limits of its attempted employment beyond the bounds of 
all experience. 

We, may, then, and indeed we must, regard as abortive all 
attempts, hitherto made, to establish a metaphysic dogmatic- 
ally. For the analytic part in any such attempted system, 
namely, the mere analysis of the concepts that inhere in our 
reason a priori, is by no means the aim of, but only a prepara- 
tion for, metaphysics proper, that is, the extension of its a 
priori synthetic knowledge. For such a purpose, the analysis 
of concepts is useless, since it merely shows what is contained 
in these concepts, not how we arrive at them apriori . A solution 



58 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

of this latter problem is required, that we may be able to de- 
B 24 termine the valid employment of such concepts in regard to 
the objects of all knowledge in general. Nor is rrfuch self-denial 
needed to give up these claims, seeing that the undeniable, 
and in the dogmatic procedure of reaston also unavoidable, 
contradictions of reason with itself have long since undermined 
the authority of every metaphysical system yet propounded. 
Greater firmness will be required if we are not to be deterred 
by inward difficulties and outward opposition from endeavour- 
ing, through application of a method entirely different from 
any hitherto employed, at last to bring to a prosperous and 
fruitful growth a science indispensable to human reason a 
science whose every branch may be cut away but whose root 
cannot be destroyed. 1 

VII. THE IDEA AND DIVISION OF A SPECIAL SCIENCE, 

UNDER THE TITLE "CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON" 2 

In view of all these considerations, we arrive at the idea of 
a special science which can be entitled 3 the Critique of Pure 

A 1 1 Reason.* For reason is the faculty which supplies the principles 
of a priori knowledge. Pure reason is, therefore, that which 
contains the principles whereby we know anything absolutely 
a priori. An organon of pure reason would be the sum-total of 

B 25 those principles according to which all modes of pure a priori 
knowledge can be acquired and actually brought into being. 
The exhaustive application of such an organon would give 
rise to a system of pure reason. But as this would be asking 
rather much, and as it is still doubtful whether, and in what 
cases, any 4 extension of our knowledge be here 5 possible, we 

* [In A follow two sentences, omitted in B]: 

Any knowledge is entitled pure, if it be not mixed with any- 
thing extraneous. But knowledge is more particularly to be 
called absolutely pure, if no experience or sensation whatso- 
ever be mingled with it, and if it be therefore possible com- 
pletely a priori. 

1 [End of the new sections added in B.] * [Heading added in B.] 

8 [In A: dicnen konne for heissen kann.] 4 [In A: eine solche.} 

[hier added in B.j 



INTRODUCTION 59 

can regard a science of the mere examination of pure reason, 
of its sources and limits, as the propaedeutic to the system of 
pure reason. As such, it should be called a critique, not a 
doctrine, of pure reason. Its utility, in speculation, 1 ought 
properly to be only negative, not to extend, but only to clarify 
our reason, and keep it free from errors which is already 
a very great gain. I entitle transcendental all knowledge 
which is occupied not so much with objects as with the 
mode of our knowledge of objects in so far as this mode of A 12 
knowledge is to be possible a priori? A system of such con- 
cepts might be entitled transcendental philosophy. But that 
is still, 3 at this stage, too large an undertaking. For since 
such a science must contain, with completeness, both kinds 
of a priori knowledge, the analytic no less than the synthetic, 
it is, so far as our present purpose is concerned, much too 
comprehensive. We have to carry the analysis so far only 
as is indispensably necessary in order to comprehend, in 
their whole extent, the principles of a priori synthesis, with 
which alone we are called upon to deal. It is upon this B 26 
enquiry, which should be entitled not a doctrine, but only 
a transcendental critique, that we are now engaged. Its pur- 
pose is not to extend knowledge, but only to correct it, and to 
supply a touchstone of the value, or lack of value, of all a priori 
knowledge. Such a critique is therefore a preparation, so far 
as may be possible, for an organon; and should this turn out 
not to be possible, then at least for a canon, according to which, 
in due course, the complete system of the philosophy of pure 
reason be it in extension or merely in limitation of its know- 
ledge may be carried into execution, analytically as well as 
synthetically. That such a system is possible, and indeed that 
it may not be of such great extent as to cut us off from the hope 
of entirely completing it, may already be gathered from the 
fact that what here constitutes our subject-matter is not the 
nature of things, which is inexhaustible, but the understand- A 13 
ing which passes judgment upon the nature of things; and this 
understanding, again, only in respect of its a priori knowledge. 
These a priori possessions of the understanding, since they 

1 [in Ansehung der Spekulation added in B.] 

1 [In A: as with our a priori concepts of objects in general.] 

\noch added in B.] 



60 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

have not to be sought for without, cannot remain hidden from 
us, and in all probability are sufficiently small in extent to allow 
of our apprehending them in their completeness, of judging 
B 27 as to their value or lack of value, and so of rightly appraising 
them. Still less 1 may the reader here expect a critique of 
books and systems of pure reason; we are concerned only with 
the critique of the faculty of pure reason itself. Only in so far 
as we build upon this foundation do we have a reliable touch- 
stone for estimating the philosophical value of old and new 
works in this field. Otherwise the unqualified historian or critic 
is passing judgments upon the groundless assertions of others 
by means of his own, which are equally groundless. 

2 Transcendental philosophy is only the idea of a science, 3 
for which the critique of pure reason has to lay down the 
complete architectonic plan. That is to say, it has to guaran- 
tee, as following from principles, the completeness and cer- 
tainty of the structure in all its parts. It is the system of 
all principles of pure reason. 4 And if this critique is not 
itself to be entitled a transcendental philosophy, it is solely be- 
cause, to be a complete system, it would also have to contain 
an exhaustive analysis of the whole of a priori human know- 
ledge. Our critique must, indeed, supply a complete enumera- 
tion of all the fundamental concepts that go to constitute such 
pure knowledge. But it is not required to give an exhaustive 
analysis of these concepts, nor a complete review of those 
that can be derived from them. Such a demand would be 
A 14 unreasonable, partly because this analysis would not be 
B 28 appropriate to our main purpose, inasmuch as there is no 
such uncertainty in regard to analysis as we encounter in the 
case of synthesis, for the sake of which alone our whole critique 
is undertaken; and partly because it would be inconsistent 
with the unity of our plan to assume responsibility for the^com- 
pleteness of such an analysis and derivation, when in view of our 
purpose we can be excused from doing so. The analysis of these 
a priori concepts, which later we shall have to enumerate, and 
the derivation of other concepts from them, can easily, how- 

1 ["Still less . . ." to end of paragraph added in B.] 

* [In A this paragraph is preceded by the heading: The Division of Trans- 
cendental Philosophy^ 

3 [In A: as here referred to, is only an idea.] 

4 [This sentence added in B.] 



INTRODUCTION 61 

ever, be made complete when once they have been established 
as exhausting the principles of synthesis, and if in this essen- 
tial respect nothing be lacking in them. 

The critique of pure reason therefore will contain all that 
is essential in transcendental philosophy. While it is the com- 
plete idea of transcendental philosophy, it is not equivalent 
to that latter science; for it carries the analysis only so far as 
is requisite for the complete examination of knowledge which 
is a priori and synthetic. 

What has chiefly to be kept in view in the division of such 
a science, is that no concepts be allowed to enter which con- 
tain in themselves anything empirical, or, in other words, 
that it consist in knowledge wholly a priori. Accordingly, 
although the highest principles and fundamental concepts of 
morality are a priori knowledge, they have no place in tran- A 15 
scendental philosophy, because, 1 although they do not lay at B 29 
the foundation of their precepts the concepts of pleasure 
and pain, of the desires and inclinations, etc., all of which 
are of empirical origin, yet in the construction of a system 
of pure morality these empirical concepts must necessarily 
bebrought into the concept of duty, as representing either a 
hindrance, which we have to overcome, or an allurement, which 
must not be made into a motive. Transcendental philosophy is 
therefore a philosophy of pure and merely speculative reason. 
All that is practical, so far as it contains motives, relates to 
feelings, and these belong to the empirical sources of know- 
ledge. 

If we are to make a systematic division of the science 
which we are engaged in presenting, it must have first a 
doctrine of the elements &gt; and secondly, a doctrine of the method 
of pure reason. Each of these chief divisions will have its 
subdivisions, but the grounds of these we are not yet in a 
position to explain. By way of introduction or anticipation 
we need only say that there are two stems of human know- 
ledge, namely, sensibility and understanding, which perhaps 
spring from a common, but to us unknown, root. Through the 
former, objects are given to us; through the latter, they are 

1 ["Because, although they . . . made into a motive" substituted in B for: 
since the concepts of pleasure and pain, of the desires and inclinations, of free- 
will, etc., have to be presupposed.] 



62 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

thought. Now in so far as sensibility may be found to contain 

B 30 a priori representations constituting the condition 1 under 

which objects are given to us, it will belong to- transcendental 

A 16 philosophy. And since the conditions under which alone the 

objects of human knowledge are given must precede those 

under which they are thought, the transcendental doctrine 

of sensibility will constitute the first part of the science of the 

elements. 

1 [In A: conditions.] 



CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

I 

TRANSCENDENTAL DOCTRINE OF 
ELEMENTS 



TRANSCENDENTAL DOCTRINE OF /Ai 9 

\B33 

ELEMENTS 



FIRST PART 
TRANSCENDENTAL AESTHETIC 



IN whatever manner and by whatever means a mode of know- 
ledge 2 may relate to objects, intuition is that through which 
it is in immediate relation to them, and from which all thought 
gains its material. But intuition takes place only in so far as the 
objeqt is given to us. This again is only possible, to man at least, 8 
in so far as the mind is affected in a certain way. The capacity 
(receptivity) for receiving representations through the mode 
in which we are affected by objects, is entitled sensibility. 
Objects are given to us by means of sensibility, and it alone 
yields us intuitions', they are thought through the understand- 
ing, and from the understanding arise concepts. But all thought 
must, directly or indirectly, by way of certain characters, 4 
relate ultimately to intuitions, and therefore, with us, to sensi- 
bility, because in no other way can an object be given to us. 

The effect of an object upon the faculty of representation, B 34 
so far as we are affected by it, is sensation. That intuition A 20 
which is? in relation to the object through sensation, is entitled 
empirical. The undetermined object of an empirical intuition 
is entitled appearance. 

That in the appearance which corresponds to sensation 

1 [In A the sub -sections are not numbered.] 2 \eine Erkenntnis.} 

3 [uns Menschen wenigstens added in B.] 

4 \V9rmittelst gewisser Merkmale added in B. Cf. Kant's Nachtrdge zur 
Kritik (edited by B. Erdmann, 1881), xi: " if the representation is not in itself 
the cause of the object."] 

65 F 



66 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

I term its matter\ but that which so determines * the manifold 
of appearance that it allows of being ordered 2 in certain re- 
lations, I term the form of appearance. That in which alone 
the sensations can be posited and ordered in a certain form, 
cannot itself be sensation; and therefore, while the matter of 
all appearance is given to us a posteriori only, its form must 
lie ready for the sensations a priori in the mind, and so must 
allow of being considered apart from all sensation. 

I term all representations pure (in the transcendental 
sense) in which there is nothing that belongs to sensation. The 
pure form of sensible intuitions in general, in which all the 
manifold of intuition is intuited in certain relations, must be 
found in the mind a priori. This pure form of sensibility may 

B 35 also itself be called pure intuition. If, then, I take away from 
the representation of a body that which the understanding 
thinks in regard to it, substance, force, divisibility, etc., and 

A 21 likewise what belongs to sensation, impenetrability, hardness, 
colour, etc., something still remains over from this empirical 
intuition, namely, extension and figure. These belong to pure 
intuition, which, even without any actual object of the senses 
or of sensation, exists in the mind a priori as a mere form 
of sensibility. 

The science of all principles of a priori sensibility I call 
transcendental aesthetic? There must be such a science, form- 

a The Germans are the only people who currently make use of 
the word Aesthetic' in order to signify what others call the critique 
of taste. This usage originated in the abortive attempt made by 
Baumgarten, 3 that admirable analytical thinker, to bring the critical 
treatment of the beautiful under rational principles, and so to raise its 
rules to the rank of a science. But such endeavours are fruitless. 
The said rules or criteria are, as regards their chief 4 sources, merely 
empirical, and consequently can never serve as determinate 5 a 
priori laws by which our judgment of taste must be directed. On 
the contrary, our judgment is the proper test of the correctness 
B 36 of the rules. For this reason it is advisable either 6 to give up 
using the name in this sense of critique of taste, and to reserve 
it for that doctrine of sensibility which is true science thus ap- 

\das jenige welches macht dassl\ 

[In B: geordnet werden kann for geordnet angeschaut wird.] 

[A. G. Baumgarten (1714-62): Aesthetically*).} 

\vornehmsten added in B.] * [bestimmten added in B.] 

[entweder added in B.] 



SPACE 67 

ing the first part of the transcendental doctrine of elements, B 36 
in distinction from that part which deals with the principles 
of pure thought, and which is called transcendental logic. 

In the transcendental aesthetic we shall, therefore, first A 22 
isolate sensibility, by taking away from it everything which the 
understanding thinks through its concepts, so that nothing 
may be left save empirical intuition. Secondly, we shall also 
separate off from it everything which belongs to sensation, so 
that nothing may remain save pure intuition and the mere 
form of appearances, which is all that sensibility can supply 
a priori. In the course of this investigation it will be found 
that there are two pure forms of sensible intuition, serving as 
principles of a priori knowledge, namely, space and time. To 
the consideration of these we shall now proceed. 



THE TRANSCENDENTAL AESTHETIC B 37 

SECTION I 
SPACE 

2 

Metaphysical Exposition of this Concept 1 

By means of outer sense, a property of our mind, we repre- 
sent to ourselves objects as outside us, and all without excep- 
tion in space. In space their shape, magnitude, and relation to 
one another are determined or determinable. Inner sense, 
by means of which the mind intuits itself or its inner state, 
yields indeed no intuition of the soul itself as an object; but 
there is nevertheless a determinate form [namely, time] in A 23 
which alt&gt;ne the intuition of inner states is possible, and every- 
thing which belongs to inner determinations is therefore 

proximating to the language and sense of the ancients, in their 
far-famed division of knowledge into alaOrjra /cat vorjrd or else 
to share the name with speculative philosophy, employing it partly 
in the transcendental and partly in the psychological sense. 2 

1 [" 2" and sub-heading added in B.] 
2 ["or else . . ." to end of sentence added in B.] 



68 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

represented in relations of time. Time cannot be outwardly 
intuited, any more than space can be intuited as something 
in us. What, then, are space and time? Are they real exist- 
ences? Are they only determinations or relations of things, yet 
such as would belong to things even if they were not intuited? 
Or are space and time such that they belong only to the form 

B 38 of intuition, and therefore to the subjective constitution of our 
mind, apart from which they could not be ascribed to anything 
whatsoever? In order to obtain light upon these questions, 
let us first give an exposition of the concept of space. 1 By 
exposition* (expositio) I mean the clear, though not necessarily 
exhaustive, representation of that which belongs to a concept: 
the exposition is metaphysical when it contains that which 
exhibits the concept as given a priori. 

I . Space is not an empirical concept which has been de- 
rived from outer experiences. For in order that certain sensa- 
tions be referred to something outside me (that is, to something 
in another region of space from that in which I find myself), 
and similarly in order that I may be able to represent them as 
outside and alongside 8 one another, and accordingly as not 
only different but as in different places, the representation of 
space must be presupposed. The representation of space can- 
not, therefore, be empirically obtained from the relations of 
outer appearance. On the contrary, this outer experience is 
itself possible at all only through that representation. 

A 24 2. Space is a necessary a priori representation, which 
underlies all outer intuitions. We can never represent to our- 
selves the absence of space, though we can quite well think it 

B 39 as empty of objects. It must therefore be regarded as the con- 
dition of the possibility of appearances, and not as a determina- 
tion dependent upon them. It is an a priori representation, 
which necessarily underlies outer appearances.* 

* [In A there is here inserted the following argument:] 
3. The apodeictic certainty of all geometrical propositions, 
and the possibility of their a priori construction, is grounded 
in this a priori necessity of space. Were this representation of 

1 [In B: den Begriff des Raumes crortern substituted for zuerst den Raum 
betrachten.] 

* ["By exposition . . ." to end of sentence added in B.] 
8 [und neben added in B.] 



SPACE 69 

3. 1 Space is not a discursive or, as we say, general concept 
of relations of things in general, but a pure intuition. For, in the A 25 
first place, we can represent to ourselves only one space; and 
if we speak of diverse spaces, we mean thereby only parts of 
one and the same unic^ue space. Secondly, these parts cannot 
precede the one all-embracing space, as being, as it were, 
constituents out of which it can be composed; on the contrary, 
they can be thought only as in it. Space is essentially one; 
the manifold in it, and therefore the general concept of spaces, 
depends solely on [the introduction of] limitations. Hence it 
follows that an a priori, and not an empirical, intuition under- 
lies all concepts of space. For kindred reasons, geometrical 
propositions, that, for instance, in a triangle two sides 
together are greater than the third, can never be derived 
from the general concepts of line and triangle, but only 
from intuition, and this indeed a priori, with apodeictic 
certainty. 

4.* Space is represented as an infinite given magnitude. 
Now every concept must be thought as a representation B 40 
which is contained in an infinite number of different possible 

space a concept acquired a posteriori^ and derived from outer 
experience in general, the first principles of mathematical 
determination would be nothing but perceptions. They would 
therefore all share in the contingent character of perception; 
that there should be only one straight line between two points 
would not be necessary, but only what experience always 
teaches. What is derived from experience has only compara- 
tive universality, namely, that which is obtained through in- 
duction. We should therefore only be able to say that, so far 
as hitherto observed, no space has been found which has more 

than three dimensions. 



* [In A this paragraph runs:] 

5. Space is represented as an infinite given magnitude. 
A general concept of space, which is found alike in a foot and 
in an ell, cannot determine anything in regard to magnitude. 
If there were no limitlessness in the progression of intuition, 
no concept of relations could yield a principle of their infini- 
tude. 

1 [In A: "4".] 



70 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

representations (as their common character), and which 
therefore contains these under itself; but no concept, as such, 
can be thought as containing an infinite number of representa- 
tions within itself. It is in this latter way, however, that space 
is thought; for all the parts of space 1 " coexist ad infinitum. 
Consequently, the original representation of space is an a 
Priori intuition, not a concept. 

3' 

The Transcendental Exposition of the Concept of Space 

I understand by a transcendental exposition the explana- 
tion of a concept, as a principle from which the possibility 
of other a priori synthetic knowledge can be understood. 
For this purpose it is required (i) that such knowledge does 
really flow from the given concept, (2) that this knowledge is 
possible only on the assumption of a given mode of explaining 
the concept. 

Geometry is a science which determines the properties 
of space synthetically, and yet a priori. What, then, must be 
our representation of space, in order that such knowledge 
of it may be possible? It must in its origin be intuition; for 
B 41 from a mere concept no propositions can be obtained which 
go beyond the concept as happens in geometry (Introduc- 
tion, V). 2 Further, this intuition must be a priori, that is, 
it must be found in us prior to any perception of an object, 
and must therefore be pure, not empirical, intuition. For 
geometrical propositions are one and all apodeictic, that is, 
are bound up with the consciousness of their necessity ; for 
instance, that space has only three dimensions. Such pro- 
positions cannot be empirical or, in other words, judgments 
of experience, nor can they be derived from any such judg- 
ments (Introduction, II). 3 

How, then, can there exist in the mind an outer intui- 
tion which precedes the objects themselves, and in which 
the concept of these objects can be determined a priori"} 
Manifestly, not otherwise than in so far as the intuition has 
its seat in the subject only, as the formal character of the 

1 [This whole sub-section added in B.] 
[Above, p. 52.] 3 [Above, p. 43.] 



SPACE 71 

subject, in virtue of which, in being affected by objects, it 
obtains immediate representation, that is, intuition, of them; 
and only in so far, therefore, as it is merely the form of outer 
sense in general. 

Our explanation ft thus the only explanation that makes 
intelligible the possibility of geometry, as a body of a priori 
synthetic knowledge. Any mode of explanation which fails to 
do this, although it may otherwise seem to be somewhat 
similar, can by this criterion * be distinguished from it with 
the greatest certainty. 



Conclusions from the above Concepts /A 26 

\B 4 2 

(a) Space does not represent any property of things in 
themselves, nor does it represent them in their relation to 
one another. That is to say, space does not represent any 
determination that attaches to the objects themselves, and 
which remains even when abstraction has been made of all 
the subjective conditions of intuition. For no determina- 
tions, whether absolute or relative, can be intuited prior to 
the existence of the things to which they belong, and none, 
therefore, can be intuited a priori. 

(fr) Space is nothing but the form of all appearances 
of outer sense. It is the subjective condition of sensibility, 
under which alone outer intuition is possible for us. Since, 
then, the receptivity of the subject, its capacity to be affected 
by objects, must necessarily precede all intuitions of these 
objects, it can readily be understood how the form of all 
appearances can be given prior to all actual perceptions, and 
so exist in the mind a priori, and how, as a pure intuition, in 
which all objects must be determined, it can contain, prior 
to all Experience, principles which determine the relations 
of these objects. 

It is, therefore, solely from the human standpoint that 
we can speak of space, of extended things, etc. If we depart 
from the subjective condition under which alone we can have 
outer intuition, namely, liability to be affected by objects, 
the representation of space stands for nothing whatsoever. B 43 

1 [End of the sub-section added in B.] 



72 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

A 27 This predicate can be ascribed to things only in so far as they 
appear to us, that is, only to objects of sensibility. The con- 
stant form of this receptivity, which we term sensibility, is a 
necessary condition of all the relations in which objects can 
be intuited as outside us; and if wef abstract from these 
objects, it is a pure intuition, and bears the name of space. 
Since we cannot treat the special conditions of sensibility as 
conditions of the possibility of things, but only of their appear- 
ances, we can indeed say that space comprehends all things 
that appear to us as external, but not all things in themselves, 
by whatever subject they are intuited, or whether they be 
intuited or not. For we cannot judge in regard to the intui- 
tions of other thinking beings, whether they are bound by 
the same conditions as those which limit our intuition and 
which for us are universally valid. If we add to the concept of 
the subject of a judgment the limitation under which the judg- 
ment is made, the judgment is then unconditionally valid. 
The proposition, that all things are side by side in space, is 
valid under 1 the limitation that these things are viewed as 
objects of our sensible intuition. If, now, I add the condition 
to the concept, and say that all things, as outer appearances, 
are side by side in space, the rule is valid universally and 
844 without limitation. Our exposition 2 therefore establishes the 
A 28 reality, that is, the objective validity, of space in respect of 
whatever can be presented to us outwardly as object, but also 
at the same time the ideality of space in respect of things when 
they are considered in themselves through reason, that is, 
without regard to the constitution of our sensibility. We 
assert, then, the empirical reality of space, as regards all 
possible outer experience; and yet at the same time we 
assert its transcendental ideality in other words, that it 
is nothing at all, immediately we withdraw the above con- 
dition, namely, its limitation to possible experience, and so 
look upon it as something that underlies things in them- 
selves. 

With the sole exception of space there is no subjective 
representation, referring to something outer ', which could be 

1 [In A: valid only under.] 

* [Following the 4th edition substitution of Erorterung lehrt for Erorteningcn 
lehren.} 



SPACE 73 

en titled [at once] objective [and] a priori. For* there is no other 
subjective representation from which we can derive a priori 
synthetic propositions, as we can from intuition in space ( 3 *). 
Strictly speaking, therefore, these other representations have no 
ideality, although the^ agree with the representation of space in 
this respect, that they belong merely to the subjective constitu- 
tion of our manner of sensibility, for instance, of sight, hearing, 
touch, 2 as in the case of the sensations of colours, sounds, and 
heat, which, since they are mere sensations and not intuitions, 
do not of themselves yield knowledge of any object, least of 
all any a priori knowledge. 

The above remark is intended only to guard anyone from B 45 
supposing that the ideality of space as here asserted can be 
illustrated by examples so altogether insufficient as colours, 
taste, etc. For these cannot rightly be regarded as properties 
of things, but only as changes in the subject, changes which 
may, indeed, be different for different men. In such examples 
as these, that which originally is itself only appearance, for 
instance, a rose, is being treated by the empirical understand- 
ing as a thing in itself, which, nevertheless, in respect of its A 30 
colour^ can appear differently to every observer. The tran- 
scendental concept of appearances in space, on the other hand, 
is a critical reminder that nothing intuited in space is a thing 
in itself, that space is not a form inhering in things in them- 

* ["For there is ..." to end of paragraph, substituted in B for 
the following:] 

This subjective condition of all outer appearances cannot, 
therefore, be compared to any other. The taste of a wine does 
not belong to the objective determinations of the wine, not 
even if by the wine as an object we mean the wine as appear- 
ance, but to the special constitution of sense in the subject that 
tastes it. Colours are not properties of the bodies to the in- 
tuition of which they are attached, but only modifications of 
the sense of sight, which is affected in a certain manner by 
light. Space, on the other hand, as condition of outer objects, 
necessarily belongs to their appearance or intuition. Taste and 
colours are not necessary conditions under which alone objects A 29 
can be for us objects of the senses. They are connected with 

1 [Above, p. 70.] * \Gefuhls , cf. below, p. 74.] 



74 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

selves as their intrinsic property, that objects in themselves are 
quite unknown to us, and that what we call outer objects are 
nothing but mere representations of our sensibility, the form 
of which is space. The true correlate of sensibility, the thing 
in itself, is not known, and cannot be known, through these 
representations; and in experience no question is ever asked 
in regard to it. 



B 4 6 TRANSCENDENTAL AESTHETIC 

SECTION II 
TIME 

4 
Metaphysical Exposition of the Concept of Time * 

I. Time is not an empirical concept that has been 
derived from any experience. For neither coexistence nor 
succession would ever come within our perception, if the repre- 
sentation of time were not presupposed as underlying them 
a priori. Only on the presupposition of time can we represent 
to ourselves a number of things as existing at one and the 
same time (simultaneously) or at different times (successively). 
A 31 2. Time is a necessary representation that underlies all 

the appearances only as effects accidentally added by the par- 
ticular constitution of the sense organs. Accordingly, they are 
not a priori representations, but are grounded in sensation, 
and, indeed, in the case of taste, even upon feeling 2 (pleasure 
and pain), as an effect of sensation. Further, no one can have 
a priori a representation of a colour or of any taste; whereas, 
since space concerns only the pure form of intuition, and 
therefore involves no sensation whatsoever, and nothing em- 
pirical, all kinds and determinations of space can and must be 
represented a priori^ if concepts of figures and of their rela- 
tions are to arise. Through space alone is it possible that 
things should be outer objects to us. 

1 [" 4" and sub-title added in B.] a \GcfUhl, cf. above, p. 73.] 



TIME 75 

intuitions. We cannot, in respect of appearances in general, 
remove time itself, though we can quite well think time as void 
of appearances'. Time is, therefore, given a priori. In it alone 
is actuality of appearances possible at all. Appearances may, 
one and all, vanish; *but time (as the universal condition of 
their possibility) 1 cannot itself be removed. 

3. The possibility of apodeictic principles concerning the 347 
relations of time, or of axioms of time in general, is also 
grounded upon this a priori necessity. Time has only one 
dimension; different times are not simultaneous but successive 
(just as different spaces are not successive but simultaneous). 
These principles cannot be derived from experience, for ex- 
perience would give neither strict universality nor apodeictic 
certainty. We should only be able to say that common experi- 
ence teaches us that it is so; not that it must be so. These 
principles are valid as rules under which alone experiences are 
possible; and they instruct us in regard to 2 the experiences, 

not by means of them. 

4. Time is not a discursive, or what is called a general con- 
cept, but a pure form of sensible intuition. Different times are 
but* parts of one and the same time; and the representation A 32 
which can be given only through a single object is intuition. 
Moreover, the proposition that different times cannot be 
simultaneous is not to be derived from a general concept. 
The proposition is synthetic, and cannot have its origin in 
concepts alone. It is immediately contained in the intuition 
and representation of time. 

5. The infinitude of time signifies nothing more than that 
every determinate magnitude of time is possible only through B 48 
limitations of one single time that underlies it. The original 
representation, time, must therefore be given as unlimited. 
But wjien an object is so given that its parts, and every quan- 
tity of it, can be determinately represented only through 
limitation, the whole representation cannot be given through 
concepts, since they contain only partial representations; 8 on 

the contrary, such concepts must themselves rest on immediate 
intuition. 

1 [Brackets added in B.] 

1 [Taking the 3rd edition reading of von for vor.] 

* [In A: since in their case the partial representations come first.] 



76 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

IS 1 

The Transcendental Exposition of the Contept of Time 

I may here refer to No. 3, 2 where, fqr the sake of brevity, 
I have placed under the title of metaphysical exposition what 
is properly transcendental. Here I may add that the concept 
of alteration, 8 and with it the concept of motion, as alteration 
of place, is possible only through and in the representation 
of time; and that if this representation were not an a priori 
(inner) intuition, no concept, no matter what it might be, could 
render comprehensible the possibility of an alteration, that is, 
of a combination of contradictorily opposed predicates in one 
and the same object, for instance, the being and the not-being 
of one and the same thing in one and the same place. Only in 
B 49 time can two contradictorily opposed predicates meet in one 
and the same object, namely, one after the other. Thus our 
concept of time explains the possibility of that body of a priori 
synthetic knowledge which is exhibited in the general doc- 
trine of motion, and which is by no means unfruitful. 

6* 
Conclusions from these Concepts 

(a) Time is not something which exists of itself, or which 
inheres in things as an objective determination, and it does 
not, therefore, remain when abstraction is made of all sub- 
jective conditions of its intuition. Were it self-subsistent, it 
would be something which would be actual and yet not an 
A 33 actual object. Were it a determination or order inhering in 
things themselves, it could not precede the objects as their 
condition, and be known and intuited a priori by means of 
synthetic propositions. But this 6 last is quite possible if time 
is nothing but the subjective condition under which alone 6 
intuition can take place in us. For that being so, this form 
of inner intuition can be represented prior to the objects, and 
therefore a priori. 

1 [The whole of sub-section 5 is added in B.] a [I.e. to 4, No. 3.] 

8 \Veranderung. Cf. below, pp. 216-17.] 4 [" 6" added in B.] 
* [Reading, with Grille, Dieses for Diese.] 

9 [Reading, with Erdmann, a lie in for a lie.} 



TIME 77 

(ft) Time is nothing but the form of inner sense, that is, of 
the intuition of ourselves and of our inner state. It cannot be a 
determination .of outer appearances; it has to do neither with 
shape nor position, but with the relation of representations in B 50 
our inner state. And just because this inner intuition yields no 
shape, we endeavour to make up for this want by analogies. 
We represent the time-sequence by a line progressing to in- 
finity, in which the manifold constitutes a series of one dimen- 
sion only; and we reason from the properties of this line to all 
the properties of time, with this one exception, that while the 
parts of the line are simultaneous the parts of time are always 
successive. From this fact also, that all the relations of time 
allow of being expressed in an outer intuition, it is evident that 
the representation is itself an intuition. 

(c) Time is the formal a priori condition of all appearances A 34 
whatsoever. Space, as the pure form of all outer intuition, is so 
far limited; it serves as the a priori condition only of outer 
appearances. But since all representations, whether they have 
for their objects outer things or not, belong, in themselves, as 
determinations of the mind, to our inner state; and since this 
inaer state stands under the formal condition of inner intui- 
tion, and so belongs to time, time is an a priori condition of 
all appearance whatsoever. It is the immediate condition of 
inner appearances (of our souls), and thereby the mediate con- 
dition of outer appearances. Just as I can say a priori that B 51 
all outer appearances are in space, and are determined a priori 
in conformity with the relations of space, I can also say, from 
the principle of inner sense, that all appearances whatsoever, 
that is, all objects of the senses, are in time, and necessarily 
stand in time-relations. 

If we abstract from our mode of inwardly intuiting our- 
selves the mode of intuition in terms of which we likewise 
take up into our faculty of representation * all outer intuitions 
and so take objects as they may be in themselves, then time is 
nothing. It has objective validity only in respect of appear- 
ances, these being things which we take as objects of our 
senses. It is no longer objective, if we abstract from the sensi- A 35 
bility of our intuition, that is, from that mode of representation 
which is peculiar to us, and speak of things in general. Time is 

J [in der Vorstellungskraft zu bcfassen.} 



78 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

therefore a purely subjective condition of our (human) intuition 
(which is always sensible, that is, so far as we are affected by 
objects), and in itself, apart from the subject, is nothing. 
Nevertheless, in respect of all appearances, and therefore of 
all the things which can enter into our experience, it is neces- 
sarily objective. We cannot say that all things are in time, be- 

B 52 cause in this concept of things in general we are abstracting 
from every mode of their intuition and therefore from that 
condition under which alone objects can be represented as 
being in time. If, however, the condition be added to the 
concept, and we say that all things as appearances, that is, as 
objects of sensible intuition, are in time, then the proposition 
has legitimate objective validity and universality a priori. 

What we are maintaining is, therefore, the empirical 
reality of time, that is, its objective validity in respect of all 
objects which allow of ever being given to our senses. And 
since our intuition is always sensible, no object can ever be 
given to us in experience which does not conform to the 
condition of time. On the other hand, we deny to time all 
claim to absolute reality; that is to say, we deny that it belongs 

A 36 to things absolutely, as their condition or property, indepepd- 
ently of any reference to the form of our sensible intuition; 
properties that belong to things in themselves can never be 
given to us through the senses. This, then, is what constitutes 
the transcendental ideality of time. What we mean by this 
phrase is that if we abstract from the subjective conditions of 
sensible intuition, time is nothing, and cannot be ascribed to 
the objects in themselves (apart from their relation to our in- 
tuition) in the way either of subsistence or of inherence. This 

B 53 ideality, like that of space, must not, however, be illustrated 
by false analogies with sensation, 1 because it is then assumed 
that the appearance, in which the sensible predicates inhere, 
itself has objective reality. In the case of time, such objective 
reality falls entirely away, save in so far as it is merely empir- 
ical, that is, save in so far as we regard the object itself merely 
as appearance. On this subject, the reader may refer to what 
has been said at the close of the preceding section. 2 

1 [mit den Subreptionen der Empfindung in Vergleichung zu stellcn, i.e. 
the ideality of time and space must not be confused with the ideality ascribed to 
sensations.] 

* [Above, pp. 73-4.] 



TIME 79 

S7 1 

Elucidation 

Against this theory, which admits the empirical reality of 
time, but denies its absolute and transcendental reality, I have 
heard men of intelligence so unanimously voicing an objection, 
that I must suppose it to occur spontaneously to every reader 
to whom this way of thinking is unfamiliar. The objection is 
this. Alterations 2 are real, 8 this being proved by change 4 of our A 37 
own representations even if all outer appearances, together 
with their alterations, be denied. Now alterations are possible 
only in time, and time is therefore something real. There is no 
difficulty in meeting this objection. I grant the whole argument. 
Certainly time is something real, namely, the real form of inner 
intuition. It has therefore subjective reality in respect of inner 
experience ; that is, I really have the representation of time and B 54 
of my determinations in it. Time is therefore to be regarded 
as real, not indeed as object but as the mode of representation 
of myself as object. If without this condition of sensibility I 
could intuit myself, or be intuited by another being, the very 
sarrfe determinations which we now represent to ourselves as 
alterations would yield knowledge into which the representa- 
tion of time, and therefore also of alteration, would in no 
way enter. Thus empirical reality has to be allowed to time, as 
the condition of all our experiences; on our theory, it is only 
its absolute reality that has to be denied. It is nothing but the 
form of our inner intuition." If we take away from our inner 
intuition the peculiar condition of our sensibility, the concept 
of time likewise vanishes; it does not inhere in the objects, but A 38 
merely in the subject which intuits them. 

But the reason why this objection is so unanimously urged, 

I 'can indeed say that my representations follow one another; 
but this is only to say that we are conscious of them as in a time- 
sequence, that is, in conformity with the form of inner sense. Time 
is not, therefore, something in itself, nor is it an objective determina- 
tion inherent in things. 

1 [" 7" added in B.] \Veranderungen ^ 

8 \Wirklich here, as often elsewhere, is used by Kant as the adjective corre- 
sponding to the substantive Realitdt, and in such cases it is more suitably trans- 
lated by 'real' than by 'actual'.] * [WechseL] 



8o KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

B 55 and that too by those who have nothing very convincing to say 
against the doctrine of the ideality of space, is this. They have 
no expectation of being able to prove apodeictically the abso- 
lute reality of space; for they are confronted by idealism, 
which teaches that the reality of outer objects does not allow 
of strict proof. On the other hand, the reality of the object of 
our inner sense (the reality of myself and my state) is, [they 
argue,] immediately evident through consciousness. The 
former may be merely an illusion; the latter is, on their view, 
undeniably something real. What they have failed, how- 
ever, to recognise is that both are in the same position; in 
neither case can their reality as representations be questioned, 
and in both cases they belong only to appearance, which 
always has two sides, the one by which the object is viewed in 
and by itself (without regard to the mode of intuiting it its 
nature therefore remaining always problematic), the other 
by which the form of the intuition of this object is taken into 
account. This form is not to be looked for in the object in it- 
self, but in the subject to which the object appears; neverthe- 
less, it belongs really and necessarily to the appearance of this 
object. 

Time and space are, therefore, two sources of knowledge, 
from which bodies of a priori synthetic knowledge can be 

A 39 derived. (Pure mathematics is a brilliant example of such 
knowledge, especially as regards space and its relations.) 

B 56 Time and space, taken together, are the pure forms of all 
sensible intuition, and so are what make a priori synthetic 
propositions possible. But these a priori sources of know- 
ledge, being merely conditions of our sensibility, just by 
this very fact determine their own limits, namely, that they 
apply to objects only in so far as objects are viewed as appear- 
ances, and do not present things as they are in themselves. This 
is the sole field of their validity; should we pass beyond it, no 
objective use can be made of them. This ideality 1 of space 
and time leaves, however, the certainty of empirical know- 
ledge unaffected, for we are equally sure of it, whether these 
forms necessarily inhere in things in themselves or only 
in our intuition of them. Those, on the other hand, who 
maintain the absolute reality of space and time, whether as 

'[Reading, with Laas, Adickes, and Vaihinger, Idealit&amp;t for Realitdt^ 



SPACE AND TIME 81 

subsistent l or only as inherent, must come into conflict with 
the principles of experience itself. For if they decide for the 
former alternative (which is generally the view taken by 
mathematical students of nature), they have to admit two 
eternal and infinite slf-subsistent 2 non-entities 8 (space and 
time), which are there (yet without there being anything real) 
only in order to contain in themselves all that is real. If they 
adopt the latter alternative (as advocated by certain meta- A 40 
physical students of nature), and regard space and time as 
relations of appearances, alongside or in succession to one B 57 
another relations abstracted from experience, and in this 
isolation confusedly represented they are obliged to deny 
that a priori mathematical doctrines have any validity in 
respect of real things (for instance, in space), or at least to 
deny their apodeictic certainty. For such certainty is not to 
be found in the a posteriori. On this view, indeed, the a priori 
concepts of space and time are merely creatures of the im- 
agination, whose source must really be sought in experience, 
the imagination framing out of the relations abstracted from 
experience something that does indeed contain what is 
general in these relations, but which cannot exist without 
the restrictions which nature has attached to them. The 
former thinkers obtain at least this advantage, that they keep 
the field of appearances open for mathematical propositions. 
On the other hand, they have greatly embarrassed them- 
selves by those very conditions [space and time, eternal, 
infinite, and self-subsistent], when with the understanding 
they endeavour to go out beyond this field. The latter have 
indeed an advantage, in that the representations of space 
and time do not stand in their way if they seek to judge 
of objects, not as appearances but merely in their relation 
to the understanding. But since they are unable to appeal to 
a true and objectively valid a priori intuition, they can neither 
account for the possibility of a priori mathematical know- 
ledge, nor bring the propositions of experience into necessary A 41 
agreement with it. On our theory of the true character of B 58 
these two original forms of sensibility, both difficulties are 
removed. 

Lastly, transcendental aesthetic cannot contain more than 

1 [subsistierend.] * [fur sick bestehendt.] 8 [Undinge.] 

G 



82 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

these two elements, space and time. This is evident from the 
fact that all other concepts belonging to sensibility, even 
that of motion, in which both elements are united, presuppose 
something empirical. Motion presupposes the perception of 
something movable. But in space, considered in itself, there 
is nothing movable; consequently the movable must be 
something that is found in space only through experience^ 
and must therefore be an empirical datum. For the same 
reason, transcendental aesthetic cannot count the concept 
of change among its a priori data. Time itself does not change, 
but only something which is in time. The concept of time 
thus presupposes the perception of something existing and 
of the succession of its determinations; that is to say, it pre- 
supposes experience. 

B 59 8 1 

General Observations on Transcendental Aesthetic 

I. 1 To avoid all misapprehension, it is necessary to ex- 
plain, as clearly as possible, what our view is regarding the 
A 42 fundamental constitution of sensible knowledge in general. 

What we have meant to say is that all our intuition is 
nothing but the representation of appearance; that the things 
which we intuit are not in themselves what we intuit them 
as being, nor their relations so constituted in themselves as 
they appear to us, and that if the subject, or even only the 
subjective constitution of the senses in general, be removed, 
the whole constitution and all the relations of objects in 
space and time, nay space and time themselves, would vanish. 
As appearances, they cannot exist in themselves, but only 
in us. What objects may be in themselves, and apart from 
all this receptivity of our sensibility, remains completely 
unknown to us. We know nothing but our mode of perceiving 
them a mode which is peculiar to us, and not necessarily 
shared in by every being, though, certainly, by every human 
being. With this alone have we any concern. Space and time 
B6o are its pure forms, and sensation in general its matter. The 
former alone can we know a priori ', that is, prior to all actual 
perception; and such knowledge is therefore called pure 
1 [" 8" and "I" added in B.] 



TRANSCENDENTAL AESTHETIC 83 

intuition. The latter is that in our knowledge which leads to 
its being called a posteriori knowledge, that is, empirical 
intuition. The former inhere in our sensibility with absolute 
necessity, no matter of what kind our sensations may be; the 
latter can exist in varying modes. Even if we could bring our A 43 
intuition to the highest degree of clearness, we should not 
thereby come any nearer to the constitution of objects in 
themselves. We should still know only our mode of intuition, 
that is, our sensibility. We should, indeed, know it completely, 
but always only under the conditions of space and time 
conditions which are originally inherent in the subject. 
What the objects may be in themselves would never be- 
come known to us even through the most enlightened 
knowledge of that which is alone given us, namely, their 
appearance. 

The concept of sensibility and of appearance would be 
falsified, and our whole teaching in regard to them would be 
rendered empty and useless, if we were to accept the view that 
our entire sensibility is nothing but a confused representation 
of things, containing only what belongs to them in themselves, 
but doing so under an aggregation of characters and partial 
representations that we do not consciously distinguish. For 
the difference between a confused and a clear representation B 61 
is merely logical, and does not concern the content. No doubt 
the concept of 'right', 1 in its common-sense usage, contains all 
that the subtlest speculation can develop out of it, though in 
its ordinary and practical use we are not conscious of the 
manifold representations comprised in this a thought. But we 
cannot say that the common concept is therefore sensible, con- 
taining a mere appearance. For * right' can never be an appear- A 44 
ance; it is a concept in the understanding, and represents a 
property (the moral property) of actions, which belongs to 
them in themselves. The representation of a body in intuition, 
on the other hand, contains nothing that can belong to an 
object in itself, but merely the appearance of something, and 
the mode in which we are affected by that something; and this 
receptivity of our faculty of knowledge is termed sensibility. 
Even if that appearance could become completely transparent 

1 [*/.] 
* [Reading, with 4th edition, diesem for diesen.} 



84 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

to us, such knowledge would remain toto coelo different from 
knowledge of the object in itself. 

The philosophy of Leibniz and Wolff, in thus treating the 
difference between the sensible and the intelligible as merely 
logical, has given a completely wrong direction to all in- 
vestigations into the nature and origin of our knowledge. This 
difference is quite evidently transcendental. It does not merely 

B 62 concern their [logical] form, as being either clear or confused. 
It concerns their origin and content. It is not that by our 
sensibility we cannot know the nature of things in themselves 
in any save a confused fashion; we do not apprehend them in 
any fashion whatsoever. If our subjective constitution be re- 
moved, the represented object, with the qualities which sen- 
sible intuition bestows upon it, is nowhere to be found, and 
cannot possibly be found. For it is this subjective constitution 
which determines its form as appearance. 

A 45 We commonly distinguish in appearances that which is 
essentially inherent in their intuition and holds for sense in all 
human beings, from that which belongs to their intuition 
accidentally only, and is valid not in relation to sensibility in 
general but only in relation to a particular standpoint or t3 a 
peculiarity of structure in this or that sense. The former kind 
of knowledge is then declared to represent the object in itself, 
the latter its appearance only. But this distinction is merely 
empirical. If, as generally happens, we stop short at this point, 
and do not proceed, as we ought, to treat the empirical in- 
tuition as itself mere appearance, in which nothing that belongs 
to a thing in itself can be found, our transcendental distinction 
is lost. We then believe that we know things in themselves, 
and this in spite of the fact that in the world of sense, how- 

B 63 ever deeply we enquire into its objects, we have to do with 
nothing but appearances. The rainbow in a sunny shower may 
be called a mere appearance, and the rain the thing in itself. 
This is correct, if the latter concept be taken in a merely 
physical sense. Rain will then be viewed only as that which, 
in all experience and in all its various positions relative to the 
senses, is determined thus, and not otherwise, in our intuition. 
But if we take this empirical object in its general character, 

A 46 and ask, without considering whether or not it is the same 
for all human sense, whether it represents an object in 



TRANSCENDENTAL AESTHETIC 85 

itself (and by that we cannot mean the drops of rain, for these 
are already, as appearances, empirical objects), the question 
as to the relation of the representation to the object at once 
becomes transcendental. We then realise that not only are the 
drops of rain mere appearances, but that even their round 
shape, nay even the space in which they fall, are nothing in 
themselves, but merely modifications or fundamental forms of 
our sensible intuition, and that the transcendental object 
remains unknown to us. 

The second important concern of our Transcendental Aes- 
thetic is that it should not obtain favour merely as a plausible 
hypothesis, but should have that certainty and freedom from 
doubt which is required of any theory that is to serve as an 
organon. To make this certainty completely convincing, we 
shall select a case by which the validity of the position adopted 
will be rendered obvious, and which will serve to set what has B 64 
been said in 3 in a clearer light. 

Let us suppose that space and time are in themselves 
objective, and are conditions of the possibility of things in 
themselves. In the first place, it is evident that in regard to 
both there is a large number of a priori apodeictic and syn- 
thetic propositions. This is especially true of space, to which 
our chief attention will therefore be directed in this enquiry. 
Since the propositions of geometry are synthetic a priori &gt; and 
are known with apodeictic certainty, I raise the question, A 47 
whence do you obtain such propositions, and upon what does 
the understanding rely in its endeavour to achieve such abso- 
lutely necessary and universally valid truths? There is no 
other way than through concepts or through intuitions; and 
these are given either a priori or a posteriori. In their latter 
form, namely, as empirical concepts, and also as that upon 
which these are grounded, the empirical intuition, neither the 
concepts nor the intuitions can yield any synthetic proposition 
except such as is itself also merely empirical (that is, a pro- 
position of experience), and which for that very reason can 
never possess the necessity and absolute universality which are 
characteristic of all geometrical propositions. As regards the 
first and sole means of arriving at such knowledge, namely, 
in a priori fashion through mere concepts or through in- 
tuitions, it is evident that from mere concepts only analytic 



86 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

B 65 knowledge, not synthetic knowledge, is to be obtained. Take, 
for instance, the proposition, "Two straight lines cannot en- 
close a space, and with them alone no figufe is possible", 
and try to derive it from the concept of straight lines and of 
the number two. Or take the proposition," "Given three straight 
lines, a figure is possible", and try, in like manner, to derive 
it from the concepts involved. All your labour is vain; and you 
find that you are constrained to have recourse to intuition, as is 
always done in geometry. You therefore give yourself an object 

A 48 in intuition. But of what kind is this intuition? Is it a pure a 
priori intuition or an empirical intuition? Were it the latter, 
no universally valid proposition could ever arise out of it 
still less an apodeictic proposition for experience can never 
yield such. You must therefore give yourself an object a priori 
in intuition, and ground upon this your synthetic proposition. 
If there did not exist in you a power of a priori intuition; and 
if that subjective condition were not also at the same time, as 
regards its form, the universal a priori condition under which 
alone the object of this outer intuition is itself possible; if the 
object (the triangle) were something in itself, apart from any 
relation to you, the subject, how could you say that what 
necessarily exist in you as subjective conditions for the con- 
struction of a triangle, must of necessity belong to the triangle 
itself? You could not then add anything new (the figure) to 

B 66 your concepts (of three lines) as something which must neces- 
sarily be met with in the object, since this object is [on that 
view] given antecedently to your knowledge, and not by means 
of it. If, therefore, space (and the same is true of time) were 
not merely a form of your intuition, containing conditions a 
priori, under which alone things can be outer objects to you, 
and without which subjective conditions outer objects are in 
themselves * nothing, you could not in regard to outer objects 
determine anything whatsoever in an a priori and synthetic 
manner. It is, therefore, not merely possible or probable, but 

A 49 indubitably certain, that space and time, as the necessary 
conditions of all outer and inner experience, are merely sub- 
jective conditions of all our intuition, and that in relation to 
these conditions all objects are therefore mere appearances, 
and not given us as things in themselves which exist in this 

1 [an sick, meaning as outer objects.} 



TRANSCENDENTAL AESTHETIC 87 

manner. For this reason also, while much can be said a priori 
as regards the form of appearances, nothing whatsoever can 
be asserted of -the thing in itself, which may underlie these 
appearances. 

II. 1 In confirmation of this theory of the ideality of both 
outer and inner sense, and therefore of all objects of the senses, 
as mere appearances, it is especially relevant to observe that 
everything in our knowledge which belongs to intuition 
feeling of pleasure and pain, and the will, not being know- 
ledge, are excluded contains nothing but mere relations; 
namely, of locations in an intuition (extension), of change B 67 
of location (motion), and of laws according to which this 
change is determined (moving forces). What it is that is 
present in this or that location, or what it is that is operative 2 
in the things themselves apart from change of location, is not 
given through intuition. Now a thing in itself 8 cannot be 
known through mere relations; and we may therefore conclude 
that since outer sense gives us nothing but mere relations, this 
sense can contain in its representation only the relation of an 
object to the subject, and not the inner properties of the object 
in kself . This also holds true of inner sense, not only because 
the representations of the outer senses constitute the proper 
material with which we occupy our mind, but because the 
time in which we set these representations, which is itself ante- 
cedent to the consciousness of them in experience, and which 
underlies them as the formal condition of the mode in which 
we posit 4 them in the mind, itself contains [only] relations of 
succession, coexistence, and of that which is coexistent with 
succession, the enduring. Now that which, as representation, 
can be antecedent to any and every act of thinking any- 
thing, is intuition; and if it contains nothing but relations, it 
is the form of intuition. Since this form does not represent 
anything save in so far as something is posited in the mind, it 
can be nothing but the mode in which the mind is affected 
through its own activity (namely, through this positing of its 5 B 68 
representation), and so is affected by itself; in other words, it is 

1 [Sub-sections II., III., IV. and Conclusion to the Transcendental Aesthetic 
added in B.] 

* [wirke.] * [tine Sac he an sick.] * [setzen.] 

6 [Reading, with Kehrbach, seiner for ikrer.] 



88 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

nothing but an inner sense in respect of the form of that sense. 
Everything that is represented through a sense is so far always 
appearance, and consequently we must either refuse to admit 
that there is an inner sense, or we must recognise that the sub- 
ject, which is the object of the sense, can be represented through 
it only as appearance, not as that subject would judge of itself 
if its intuition were self-activity only, that is, were intellectual. 
The whole difficulty is as to how a subject can inwardly intuit 
itself; and this is a difficulty common to every theory. The con- 
sciousness of self (apperception) is the simple representation 
of the T, and if all that is manifold in the subject were given 
by the activity of the se/f, the inner intuition would be intel- 
lectual. In man this consciousness demands inner perception 
of the manifold which is antecedently given in the subject, 
and the mode in which this manifold is given in the mind 
must, as non-spontaneous, be entitled sensibility. If the 
faculty of coming to consciousness of oneself is to seek out (to 
apprehend) that which lies in the mind, it must affect the mind, 
and only in this way can it give rise to an intuition of itself. 
But the form of this intuition, which exists antecedently in the 
B 69 mind, determines, in the representation of time, the mode in 
which the manifold is together in the mind, since it then in- 
tuits itself not as it would represent itself if immediately self- 
active, but as it is affected by itself, and therefore as it appears 
to itself, not as it is. 

III. When I say that the intuition of outer objects and the 
self-intuition of the mind alike represent the objects and the 
mind, in space and in time, as they affect our senses, that is, as 
they appear, I do not mean to say that these objects are a mere 
illusion.* For in an appearance the objects, nay even the pro- 
perties that we ascribe to them, are always regarded as some- 
thing actually given. Since, however, in the relation of the 
given object to the subject, such properties depend upon the 
mode of intuition of the subject, this object as appearance* is to 
be distinguished from itself as object in itself. Thus when I 
maintain that the quality of space and of time, in conformity 
with which, as a condition of their existence, I posit both bodies 
and my own soul, lies in my mode of intuition and not in those 
objects in themselves, I am not saying that bodies merely seem* 

1 [Schein.] * [Ersckeinung.] [scheinen.] 



TRANSCENDENTAL AESTHETIC 89 

to be outside me, or that my soul only seems to be given in my self- 
consciousness. It would be my own fault, if out of that which 
I ought to reckon as appearance, I made mere illusion. 01 That 
does not follow as a consequence of our principle of the ideality B 70 
of all our sensible intuitions quite the contrary. It is only if we 
ascribe objective reality to these forms of representation, that 
it becomes impossible for us to prevent everything being 
thereby transformed into mere illusion. For if we regard space 
and time as properties which, if they are to be possible at all, 1 
must be found in things in themselves, and if we reflect on the 
absurdities in which we are then involved, in that two infinite 
things, which are not substances, nor anything actually in- 
hering in substances, must yet have existence, nay, must 
be the necessary condition of the existence of all things, and B 71 
moreover must continue to exist, even although all existing 
things be removed, we cannot blame the good Berkeley 
for degrading bodies to mere illusion. Nay, even our own 
existence, in being made thus dependent upon the self-sub- 
sistent reality of a non-entity, such as time, would necessarily 
be changed with it into sheer illusion an absurdity of which 
no one has yet been guilty. 

IV. In natural theology, in thinking an object [God], 
who not only can never be an object of intuition to us but 

The predicates of the appearance can be ascribed to the object 
itself, in relation to our sense, for instance, the red colour or the B 70 
scent to the rose. [But what is illusory can never be ascribed as 
predicate to an object (for the sufficient reason that we then attribute 

to the object, taken by itself, what belongs to it only in relation to 
the senses, or in general to the subject), for instance, the two handles 
which were formerly ascribed to Saturn]. 2 That which, while in- 
separable from the representation of the object, is not to be met 
with in the object in itself, but always in its relation to the subject, 
is appearance. Accordingly the predicates of space and time are 
rightly ascribed to the objects of the senses, as such; and in this there 
is no illusion. On the other hand, if I ascribe redness to the rose in 
itself [handles to Saturn], 2 or extension to all outer objects in them- 
selves, without paying regard to the determinate relation of these 
objects to the subject, and without limiting my judgment to that 
relation, illusion then first arises. 

1 [ihrer Moglichkeit nach.] 

* [The passage which I have enclosed in brackets conflicts with the main 
argument, and is probably a later addition carelessly inserted.] 



90 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

cannot be an object of sensible intuition even to himself, we 
are careful to remove the conditions of time and space from 
his intuition for all his knowledge must be intuition, and not 
thought, which always involves limitations. But with what 
right can we do this if we have previously made time and space 
forms of things in themselves, and such as would remain, as 
a priori conditions of the existence of things, even though the 
things themselves were removed? As conditions of all existence 
in general, they must also be conditions of the existence of 
God. If we do not thus treat them as objective forms of all 
B 72 things, the only alternative is to view them as subjective forms 
of our inner and outer intuition, which is termed sensible, for 
the very reason that it is not original) that is, is not such as can 
itself give us the existence of its object a mode of intuition 
which, so far as we can judge, can belong only to the prim- 
ordial being. 1 Our mode of intuition is dependent upon the 
existence of the object, and is therefore possible only if the 
subject's faculty of representation is affected by that object. 
This mode of intuiting in space and time need not be 
limited to human sensibility. It may be that all finite, thinking 
beings necessarily agree with man in this respect, although 
we are not in a position to judge whether this is actually so. But 
however universal this mode of sensibility may be, it does 
not therefore cease to be sensibility. It is derivative (intuitus 
derivativus)) not original (intuitus originarius)&gt; and therefore 
not an intellectual intuition. For the reason stated above, such 
intellectual intuition seems to belong solely to the primordial 
being, and can never be ascribed to a dependent being, 
dependent in its existence as well as in its intuition, and 
which through that intuition determines its existence solely 
in relation to given objects. 2 This latter remark, however, 
must be taken only as an illustration of our aesthetic theory, 
not as forming part of the proof. 

B 73 Conclusion of the Transcendental Aesthetic 

Here, then, in pure a priori intuitions, space and time, 
we have one of the factors required for solution of the general 

1 [nur dem Urwesen.} 

* [May be more freely translated as: "through that intuition is conscious of 
its own existence only in relation to given objects".] 



TRANSCENDENTAL AESTHETIC 91 

problem of transcendental philosophy: how are synthetic 
a priori judgments possible? When in a priori judgment 
we seek to go oat beyond the given concept, we come in the 
a priori intuitions upon that which cannot be discovered in 
the concept but which* is certainly found a priori in the in- 
tuition corresponding to the concept, and can be connected 
with it synthetically. Such judgments, however, thus based 
on intuition, can never extend beyond objects of the senses; 
they are valid only for objects of possible experience. 



TRANSCENDENTAL DOCTRINE OF 
ELEMENTS 

SECOND PART 
TRANSCENDENTAL LOGIC 

INTRODUCTION 
IDEA OF A TRANSCENDENTAL LOGIC 

I 

LOGIC IN GENERAL 

OUR knowledge springs from two fundamental sources* of the 
mind; the first is the capacity of receiving representations 
(receptivity for impressions), the second is the power of know- 
ing an object through these representations (spontaneity [in 
the production] of concepts). Through the first an object is given 
to us, through the second the object is thought in relation to 
that [given] representation (which is a mere determination of 
the mind). Intuition and concepts constitute, therefore, the ele- 
ments of all our knowledge, so that neither concepts without an 
intuition in some way corresponding to them, nor intuition with- 
out concepts, can yield knowledge. Both may be either pure or 
empirical. When they contain sensation (which presupposes the 
actual presence of the object), they are empirical. When there is 
no mingling of sensation with the representation, they are pure. 
Sensation may be entitled the material of sensible knowledge. 
B 75 Pure intuition, therefore, contains only the form under which 
A 51 something is intuited; the pure concept only the form of the 
thought of an object in general. Pure intuitions or pure con- 
cepts alone are possible a priori, empirical intuitions and 
empirical concepts only a posteriori. 

92 



TRANSCENDENTAL LOGIC 93 

If the receptivity of our mind, its power of receiving re- 
presentations in so far as it is in any wise affected, is to be 
entitled sensibility, then the mind's power of producing repre- 
sentations from itself, the spontaneity of knowledge, should be 
called the understanding. Our nature is so constituted that 
our intuition can never be other than sensible; that is, it con- 
tains only the mode in which we are affected by objects. The 
faculty, on the other hand, which enables us to think the 
object of sensible intuition is the understanding. To neither 
of these powers may a preference be given over the other. 
Without sensibility no object would be given to us, without 
understanding no object would be thought. Thoughts without 
content are empty, intuitions without concepts are blind. It 
is, therefore, just as necessary to make our concepts sensible, 
that is, to add the object to them in intuition, as to make 
our intuitions intelligible, that is, to bring them under con- 
cepts. These two powers or capacities cannot exchange their 
functions. The understanding can intuit nothing, the senses 
can think nothing. Only through their union can know- 
ledge arise. But that is no reason for confounding the B 76 
contribution of either with that of the other; rather is it 
a strong reason for carefully separating and distinguishing A 52 
the one from the other. We therefore distinguish the science 
of the rules of sensibility in general, that is, aesthetic, from 
the science of the rules of the understanding in general, that 
is, logic. 

Logic, again, can be treated in a twofold manner, either 
as logic of the general or as logic of the special employment 
of the understanding. The former contains the absolutely 
necessary rules of thought without which there can be no 
employment whatsoever of the understanding. It therefore 
treats of understanding without any regard to difference in 
the objects to which the understanding may be directed. The 
logic of the special employment of the understanding contains 
the rules of correct thinking as regards a certain kind of 
objects. The former may be called the logic of elements, the 
latter the organon of this or that science. The latter is com- 
monly taught in the schools as a propaedeutic to the sciences, 
though, according to the actual procedure of human reason, 
it is what is obtained last of all, when the particular science 



94 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

under question has been already brought to such completion 
that it requires only a few finishing touches to correct and 
perfect it. For the objects under consideration must already 
be known fairly completely before it can be possible to pre- 

B 77 scribe the rules according to which a science of them is to 
be obtained. 

General logic is either pure or applied. In the former we 

A 53 abstract from all empirical conditions under which our under- 
standing is exercised, i.e. from the influence of the senses, the 
play of imagination, the laws of memory, the force of habit, 
inclination, etc., and so from all sources of prejudice, indeed 
from all causes from which this or that knowledge may arise 
or seem to arise. For they concern the understanding only in 
so far as it is being employed under certain circumstances, 
and to become acquainted with these circumstances experi- 
ence is required. Pure general logic has to do, therefore, only 
with principles a priori^ and is a canon of understanding and 
of reason, but only in respect of what is formal in their em- 
ployment, be the content what it may, empirical or tran- 
scendental. General logic is called applied, when it is directed 
to the rules of the employment of understanding under the 
subjective empirical conditions dealt with by psychology. 
Applied logic has therefore empirical principles, although it 
is still indeed in so far general that it refers to the employ- 
ment of the understanding without regard to difference in the 
objects. Consequently it is neither a canon of the under- 

B 78 standing in general nor an organon of special sciences, but 
merely a cathartic of the common understanding. 

In general logic, therefore, that part which is to constitute 
the pure doctrine of reason must be entirely separated from 

A 54 that which constitutes applied (though always still general) 
logic. The former alone is, properly speaking, a science, 
though indeed concise and dry, as the methodical exposition 
of a doctrine of the elements of the understanding is bound 
to be. There are therefore two rules which logicians must 
always bear in mind, in dealing with pure general logic: 

I. As general logic, it abstracts from all content of the 
knowledge of understanding and from all differences in its 
objects, and deals with nothing but the mere form of 
thought. 



TRANSCENDENTAL LOGIC 95 

2. As pure logic, it has nothing to do with empirical prin- 
ciples, and does not, as has sometimes been supposed, borrow 
anything from psychology, which therefore has no influence 
whatever on the canon of the understanding. Pure logic is a 
body of demonstrated doctrine, and everything in it must be 
certain entirely a priori. 

What I call applied logic (contrary to the usual meaning 
of this title, according to which it should contain certain 
exercises for which pure logic gives the rules) is a representa- 
tion of the understanding and of the rules of its necessary 
employment in concrete^ that is, under the accidental sub- 
jective conditions which may hinder or help its application, B 79 
and which are all given only empirically. It treats of attention, 
its impediments x and consequences, of the source of error, of 
the state of doubt, hesitation, and conviction, etc. Pure general 
logic stands to it in the same relation as pure ethics, which 
contains only the necessary moral laws of a free will in general, A 55 
stands to the doctrine of the virtues strictly so called the 
doctrine which considers these laws under the limitations of 
the feelings, inclinations, and passions to which men are 
moreor less subject. Such a doctrine can never furnish a 
true and demonstrated science, because, like applied logic, 
it depends on empirical and psychological principles. 



II 

TRANSCENDENTAL LOGIC 

General logic, as we have shown, abstracts from all con- 
tent of knowledge, that is, from all relation of knowledge to 
the object, and considers only the logical form in the relation of 
any knowledge to other knowledge; that is, it treats of the form 
of thought in general. But since, as the Transcendental Aes- 
thetic has shown, there are pure as well as empirical intuitions, 
a distinction might likewise be drawn between pure and em- 
pirical thought of objects. In that case we should have a logic B 80 
in which we do not abstract from the entire content of know- 
ledge. This other logic, which should contain solely the rules 
of the pure thought of an object, would exclude only those 

1 [Reading, with Erdmann, Hindernissen for Hindernis^\ 



96 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

modes of knowledge l which have empirical content. It would 
also treat of the origin of the modes in which we know objects, 

A 56 in so far as that origin cannot be attributed to the objects. 
General logic, on the other hand, has nothing to do with the 
origin of knowledge, but only considers representations, be 
they originally a priori in ourselves or only empirically given, 
according to the laws which the understanding employs when, 
in thinking, it relates them to one another. It deals therefore 
only with that form which the understanding is able to impart 
to the representations, from whatever source they may have 
arisen. 

And here I make a remark which the reader must bear 
well in mind, as it extends its influence over all that follows. 
Not every kind of knowledge a priori should be called tran- 
scendental, but that only by which we know that and how 
certain representations (intuitions or concepts) can be em- 
ployed or are possible purely a priori. The term 'transcend- 
ental', that is to say, signifies such knowledge as concerns the 

B 81 a priori possibility of knowledge, or its a priori employment. 
Neither space nor any a priori geometrical determination of it 
is a transcendental representation; what can alone be entitled 
transcendental is the knowledge that these representations are 
not of empirical origin, and the possibility that they can 2 yet 
relate a priori to objects of experience. The application of 
space to objects in general would likewise be transcendental, 
but, if restricted solely to objects of sense, it is empirical. 

A 57 The distinction between the transcendental and the empirical 
belongs therefore only to the critique of knowledge; it does 
not concern the relation of that knowledge to its objects. 

In the expectation, therefore, that there may perhaps be 
concepts which relate a priori to objects, not as pure or sen- 
sible intuitions, but solely as acts of pure thought that is, as 
concepts which are neither of empirical nor of aesthetic 
origin we form for ourselves by anticipation the idea of a 
science of the knowledge which belongs to pure understanding 8 
and reason, whereby we think objects entirely a priori. Such 
a science, which should determine the origin, the scope, and 

1 [Reading, with Adickes, Moss allc for alle.} 

* [Reading, with Erdmann, konnen for konne.] 

3 [Reading, with Erdmann, Verstandes- for Verstandes.} 



TRANSCENDENTAL LOGIC 97 

the objective validity of such knowledge, would have to be 
called transcendental logic, because, unlike general logic, B 82 
which has to deal with both empirical and pure knowledge of 
reason, it concerns itself with the laws of understanding and 
of reason solely in so far as they relate a priori to objects. 



Ill 

THE DIVISION OF GENERAL LOGIC INTO ANALYTIC 
AND DIALECTIC 

The question, famed of old, by which logicians were 
supposed to be driven into a corner, obliged either to have 
recourse to a pitiful sophism, or to confess their ignorance 
and consequently the emptiness of their whole art, is the A 58 
question: What is truth? The nominal definition of truth, 
that it is the agreement of knowledge with its object, is 
assumed as granted; the question asked is as to what is 
the general and sure criterion of the truth of any and every 
knowledge. 

To know what questions may reasonably be asked is 
already a great and necessary proof of sagacity and insight. 
For if a question is absurd in itself and calls for an answer 
where none is required, it not only brings shame on the pro- 
pounder of the question, but may betray an incautious listener 
into absurd answers, thus presenting, as the ancients said, the B 83 
ludicrous spectacle of one man milking a he-goat and the 
other holding a sieve underneath. 

If truth consists in the agreement of knowledge with its 
object, that object must thereby be distinguished from other 
objects; for knowledge is false, if it does not agree with the 
object to which it is related, even although it contains some- 
thing which may be valid of other objects. Now a general 
criterion of truth must be such as would be valid in each and 
every instance of knowledge, however their objects may vary. It 
is obvious, however, that such a criterion [being general] cannot 
take account of the [varying] content of knowledge (relation 
to its [specific] object). But since truth concerns just this very A 59 
content, it is quite impossible, and indeed absurd, to ask for a 

H 



98 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

general test of the truth of such content. A sufficient and at the 
same time general criterion of truth cannot possibly be given. 
Since we have already entitled the content of knowledge its 
matter, we must be prepared to recognise that of the truth 
of knowledge, so far as its matter is concerned, no general 
criterion can be demanded. Such a criterion would by its 
very nature be self-contradictory. 

But, on the other hand, as regards knowledge in respect 
of its mere form (leaving aside all content), it is evident that 

B 84 logic, in so far as it expounds the universal and necessary 
rules of the understanding, must in these rules furnish criteria 
of truth. Whatever contradicts these rules is false. For the 
understanding would thereby be made to contradict its own 
general rules of thought, and so to contradict itself. These 
criteria, however, concern only the form of truth, that is, of 
thought in general; and in so far they are quite correct, but 
are not by themselves sufficient. For although our knowledge 
may be in complete accordance with logical demands, that is, 
may not contradict itself, it is still possible that it may be in 
contradiction with its object. The purely logical criterion of 
truth, namely, the agreement of knowledge with the general 
and formal laws of the understanding and reason, is a conditio 
sine qua non, and is therefore the negative condition of all 

A 60 truth. But further than this logic cannot go. It has no test for 
the discovery of such error as concerns not the form but the 
content. 

General logic resolves the whole formal procedure of the 
understanding and reason into its elements, and exhibits them 
as principles of all logical examination of our knowledge. 
This part of logic, which may therefore be entitled analytic^ 
yields what is at least the negative test of truth. Its rules 
must be applied in the examination and appraising of the 
form of all knowledge before we proceed to determine whether 

B 85 their content contains positive truth in respect to their object. 
But since the mere form of knowledge, however completely 
it may be in agreement with logical laws, is far from being 
sufficient to determine the material (objective) truth of know- 
ledge, no one can venture with the help of logic alone to 
judge regarding objects, or to make any assertion. We must 
first, independently of logic, obtain reliable information; only 



TRANSCENDENTAL LOGIC 99 

then are we in a position to enquire, in accordance with logical 
laws, into the use of this information and its connection in a 
coherent whole, or rather to test it by these laws. There is, 
however, something so tempting in the possession of an art so 
specious, through which we give to all our knowledge, how- 
ever uninstructed we may be in regard to its content, the form 
of understanding, that general logic, which is merely a canon A 61 
of judgment, has been employed as if it were an organon for 
the actual production of at least the semblance of 1 objective 
assertions, and has thus been misapplied. General logic, when 
thus treated as an organon, is called dialectic. 

However various were the signifi cations in which the ancients 
used 'dialectic' as the title for a science or art, we can safely 
conclude from their actual employment of it that with them 
it was never anything else than the logic of illusion. It was a B 86 
sophistical art of giving to ignorance, and indeed to intentional 
sophistries, the appearance of truth, by the device of 2 imitat- 
ing the methodical thoroughness which logic prescribes, and 
of using its 'topic' to conceal the emptiness of its pretensions. 
Now it maybe noted as a sure and useful warning, that general 
logic,* if viewed as an organon, is always a logic of illusion, 
that is, dialectical. For logic teaches us nothing whatsoever 
regarding the content of knowledge, but lays down only the 
formal conditions of agreement with the understanding; and 
since these conditions can tell us nothing at all as to the 
objects concerned, any attempt to use this logic as an instru- 
ment (organon) that professes to extend and enlarge our 
knowledge can end in nothing but mere talk in which, with 
a certain plausibility, we maintain, or, if such be our choice, A 62 
attack, any and every possible assertion. 

Such instruction is quite unbecoming the dignity of philo- 
sophy. The title 'dialectic' has therefore come to be otherwise 
employed, and has been assigned to logic, as a critique of 
dialectical illusion. This is the sense in which it is to be under- 
stood in this work. 

1 [Reading, with Kehrbach, dcs Blendwerks^ 
2 [Reading, with Erdmann, dadurch dass.] 



ioo KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

IV 

B 87 THE DIVISION OF TRANSCENDENTAL LOGIC INTO 

TRANSCENDENTAL ANALYTIC \ND DIALECTIC 

In a transcendental logic we isolate the understanding 
as above, in the Transcendental Aesthetic, the sensibility 
separating out from our knowledge that part of thought which 
has its origin solely in the understanding. The employment of 
this pure knowledge depends upon the condition that objects 
to which it can be applied be given to us in intuition. In the 
absence of intuition all our knowledge is without objects, 
and therefore remains entirely empty. That part of transcen- 
dental logic which deals with the elements of the pure know- 
ledge yielded by understanding, and the principles without 
which no object can be thought, is transcendental analytic. It 
is a logic of truth. For no knowledge can contradict it without 

A 63 at once losing all content, that is, all relation to any object, and 
therefore all truth. But since it is very tempting to use these 
pure modes of knowledge of the understanding and these prin- 
ciples by themselves, and even beyond the limits of experience, 

B 88 which alone can yield the matter (objects) to which those pure 
concepts of understanding can be applied, the understanding is 
led to incur the risk of making, with a mere show of rationality, 
a material use of its pure and merely formal principles, and of 
passing judgments upon objects without distinction upon 
objects which are not given to us, nay, perhaps cannot in any 
way be given. Since, properly, this transcendental analytic 
should be used only as a canon for passing judgment upon the 
empirical employment of the understanding, it is misapplied 
if appealed to as an organon of its general and unlimited 
application, and if consequently we venture, with the pure 
understanding alone, to judge synthetically, to affirm, and to 
decide regarding objects in general. The employment of the 
pure understanding then becomes dialectical. The second part 
of transcendental logic must therefore form a critique of this 
dialectical illusion, and is called transcendental dialectic, not 
as an art of producing such illusion dogmatically (an art un- 
fortunately very commonly practised by metaphysical jugglers) , 
but as a critique of understanding and reason in respect of 



TRANSCENDENTAL LOGIC 101 

their hyperphysical employment. It will expose the false, illu- 
sory character of those groundless pretensions, and in place A 64 
of the high claims to discover and to extend knowledge merely 
by means of transcendental principles, it will substitute what is 
no more than a critical treatment of the pure understanding, 
for the guarding of it against sophistical illusion. 



B89 TRANSCENDENTAL LOGIC 

FIRST DIVISION 
TRANSCENDENTAL ANALYTIC 

TRANSCENDENTAL analytic consists in the dissection of all 
our a priori knowledge into the elements that pure under- 
standing by itself yields. In so doing, the following are the 
points of chief concern: (i) that the concepts be pure and 
not empirical; (2) that they belong, not to intuition and 
sensibility, but to thought and understanding; (3) that 
they be fundamental and be carefully distinguished from 
those which are derivative or composite; (4) that our table 
of concepts be complete, covering the whole field of the pure 
understanding. When a science is an aggregate brought into 
existence in a merely experimental manner, such completeness 
can never be guaranteed by any kind of mere estimate. It is 
possible only by means of an idea of the totality of the a priori 
knowledge yielded by the understanding; such an idea can 
furnish an exact classification of the concepts which compose 

A 65 that totality, exhibiting their interconnection in a system. 
Pure understanding distinguishes itself not merely from all 
that is empirical but completely also from all sensibility. It 

B 90 is a unity self-subsistent, self-sufficient, and not to be increased 
by any additions from without. The sum of its knowledge thus 
constitutes a system, comprehended and determined by one 
idea. The completeness and articulation of this system can at 
the same time yield a criterion of the correctness and genuine- 
ness of all its components. This part of transcendental logic 
requires, however, for its complete exposition, two books, the 
one containing the concepts &gt; the other the principles of pure 
understanding. 



ANALYTIC OF CONCEPTS 103 

TRANSCENDENTAL ANALYTIC 

BOOK I 
ANALYTIC OF CONCEPTS 

By 'analytic of concepts' I do not understand their ana- 
lysis, or the procedure usual in philosophical investigations, 
that of dissecting the content of such concepts as may present 
themselves, and so of rendering them more distinct; but the 
hitherto rarely attempted dissection of the faculty of the under- 
standing itself, in order to investigate the possibility of con- A 66 
cepts a priori by looking for them in the understanding alone, 
as their birthplace, and by analysing the pure use of this 
faculty. This is the proper task of a transcendental philosophy; B 91 
anything beyond this belongs to the logical treatment of con- 
cepts in philosophy in general. We shall therefore follow up 
the pure concepts to their first seeds and dispositions in the 
human understanding, in which they lie prepared, till at last, 
on the occasion of experience, they are developed, and by the 
same understanding are exhibited in their purity, freed from 
the empirical conditions attaching to them. 



ANALYTIC OF CONCEPTS 
CHAPTER I 

THE CLUE TO THE DISCOVERY OF ALL PURE 
CONCEPTS OF THE UNDERSTANDING 

WHEN we call a faculty of knowledge into play, then, 
as the occasioning circumstances differ, various concepts 
stand forth and make the faculty known, and allow of 
their being collected with more or less completeness, in 
proportion as observation has been made of them over a longer 
time or with greater acuteness. But when the enquiry is 
carried on in this mechanical fashion, we can never be sure 
whether it has been brought to completion. Further, the con- 
A 67 cepts which we thus discover only as opportunity offers, ex- 
B 92 hibit no order and systematic unity, but are in the end merely 
arranged in pairs according to similarities, and in series accord- 
ing to the amount of their contents, from the simple on to the 
more composite an arrangement which is anything but sys- 
tematic, although to a certain extent methodically instituted. 
Transcendental philosophy, in seeking for its concepts, has 
the advantage and also the duty of proceeding according to a 
single principle. For these concepts spring, pure and unmixed, 
out of the understanding which is an absolute unity; and must 
therefore be connected with each other according to one con- 
cept or idea. Such a connection supplies us with a rule, by 
which we are enabled to assign its proper place to each pure 
concept of the understanding, and by which we can determine 
in an a priori manner their systematic completeness. Other- 
wise we should be dependent in these matters on our own 
discretionary judgment or merely on chance. 

104 



ANALYTIC OF CONCEPTS 105 



THE TRANSCENDENTAL CLUE TO THE DISCOVERY OF 
ALL PURE 'CONCEPTS OF THE UNDERSTANDING 

Section I 
THE LOGICAL EMPLOYMENT OF THE UNDERSTANDING 

The understanding has thus far been explained merely 
negatively, as a non-sensible faculty of knowledge. Now since 
without sensibility we cannot have any intuition, understand- A 68 
ing cannot be a faculty of intuition. But besides intuition there 
is no other mode of knowledge except by means of concepts. B 93 
The knowledge yielded by understanding, or at least by the 
human understanding, must therefore be by means of concepts, 
and so is not intuitive, but discursive. Whereas 1 all intuitions, 
as sensible, rest on affections, 2 concepts rest on functions. By 
'function' I mean the unity of the act of bringing various repre- 
sentations under one common representation. Concepts are 
based on the spontaneity of thought, sensible intuitions on the 
receptivity of impressions. Now the only use which the under- 
standing can make of these concepts is to judge by means of 
them. Since no representation, save when it is an intuition, 
is in immediate relation to an object, no concept is ever 
related to an object immediately, but to some other representa- 
tion of it, be that other representation an intuition, or itself 
a concept. Judgment is therefore the mediate knowledge of an 
object, that is, the representation of a representation of it. In 
every judgment there is a concept which holds of many repre- 
sentations, and among them of a given representation that is 
immediately related to an object. Thus in the judgment, 'all 
bodies are divisible', 3 the concept of the divisible applies to 
various other concepts, but is here applied in particular to 
the concept of body, and this concept again to certain appear- A 69 
ances that present themselves to us. These objects, therefore, 
are mediately represented through the concept of divisibility. 
Accordingly, all judgments are functions of unity among our 

1 [Reading, with Adickes, aber for also.} 

2 [A/ektionen] 

3 [In the 4th edition veranderlich is corrected to tetlbar.] 



io6 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

B 94 representations; instead of an immediate representation, a 
higher representation, which comprises the immediate repre- 
sentation and various others, is used in knowing the object, 
and thereby much possible knowledge is collected into one. 
Now we can reduce all acts of the understanding to judg- 
ments, and the understanding may therefore be represented 
as a faculty of judgment. For, as stated above, the under- 
standing is a faculty of thought. Thought is knowledge by 
means of concepts. But concepts, as predicates of possible 
judgments, relate to some representation of a not yet deter- 
mined object. Thus the concept of body means something, for 
instance, metal, which can be known by means of that con- 
cept. It is therefore a concept solely in virtue of its com- 
prehending other representations, by means of which it can 
relate to objects. It is therefore the predicate of a possible 
judgment, for instance, 'every metal is a body'. The functions 
of the understanding can, therefore, be discovered if we can 
give an exhaustive statement of the functions of unity in 
judgments. That this can quite easily be done will be shown 
in the next section. 



^ 7} THE CLUE TO THE DISCOVERY OF ALL PURE 
CONCEPTS OF THE UNDERSTANDING 

Section 2 

9' 

THE LOGICAL FUNCTION OF THE UNDERSTANDING IN 
JUDGMENTS 

If we abstract from all content of a judgment, and con- 
sider only the mere form of understanding, we find that the 
function of thought in judgment can be brought under four 
heads, each of which contains three moments. 2 They may be 
conveniently represented in the following table: 

1 [ u 9" added in B.] 
2 [Jlfotnente.] 



TABLE OF JUDGMENTS 107 

I 

Quantity of Judgments 

Universal 

Particular 

II Singular III 

Quality Relation 

Affirmative Categorical 

Negative Hypothetical 

Infinite Disjunctive 

IV 

Modality 
Problematic 
Assertoric 
Apodeictic 

As this division appears to depart in some, though not in B 96 
any essential respects, from the technical distinctions ordin- 
arily recognised by logicians, the following observations may A 71 
serve to guard against any possible misunderstanding. 

[. Logicians are justified in saying that, in the employ- 
ment of judgments in syllogisms, singular judgments can 
be treated like those that are universal. For, since they 
have no extension at all, the predicate cannot relate to part 
only of that which is contained in the concept of the subject, 
and be excluded from the rest. The predicate is valid of that 
concept, without any such exception, just as if it were a 
general concept and had an extension to the whole of which 
the predicate applied. If, on the other hand, we compare a 
singular with a general judgment, merely as knowledge, in 
respect of quantity, the singular stands to the universal as 
unity to infinity, and is therefore in itself essentially different 
from the universal. If, therefore, we estimate a singular judg- 
ment (judicium singular e) } not only according to its own inner 
validity, but as knowledge in general, according to its quantity 
in comparison with other knowledge, it is certainly different 
from general judgments (judicia communia), and in a com- 
plete table of the moments of thought in general deserves a 
separate place though not, indeed, in a logic limited to the 
use of judgments in reference to each other. B 97 



io8 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

2. In like manner infinite judgments must, in trans- 
cendental logic, be distinguished from those that are affirm- 

A 72 ative, although in general logic they are rightly classed with 
them, and do not constitute a separate member of the division. 
General logic abstracts from all content of the predicate (even 
though it be negative) ; it enquires only whether the predicate 
be ascribed to the subject or opposed to it. But transcendental 
logic also considers what may be the worth or content of a 
logical affirmation that is thus made by means of a merely 
negative predicate, and what is thereby achieved in the way 
of addition to our total knowledge. If I should say of the soul, 
'It is not mortal', by this negative judgment I should at least 
have warded off error. Now by the proposition, 'The soul 
is non-mortal', 1 1 have, so far as the logical form is concerned, 
really made an affirmation. I locate the soul in the unlimited 
sphere of non-mortal beings. Since the mortal constitutes 
one part of the whole extension of possible beings, and the 
non-mortal the other, nothing more is said by my proposition 
than that the soul is one of the infinite number of things which 
remain over when I take away all that is mortal. The infinite 
sphere of all that is possible is thereby only so far limited that 

B 98 the mortal is excluded from it, and that the soul is located 
in the remaining part of its extension. 2 But, even allowing 
for such exclusion, this extension 3 still remains infinite, and 
several more parts of it may be taken away without the con- 

A 73 cept of the soul being thereby in the least increased, or de- 
termined in an affirmative manner. These judgments, though 
infinite in respect of their logical extension, are thus, in respect 
of the content of their knowledge, limitative only, and cannot 
therefore be passed over in a transcendental table of all 
moments of thought in judgments, since the function of the 
understanding thereby expressed may perhaps be of import- 
ance in the field of its pure a priori knowledge. 

3. All relations of thought in judgments are (a) of the 
predicate to the subject, () of the ground to its consequence, 
(c) of the divided knowledge and of the members of the 
division, taken together, 4 to each other. In the first kind of 

1 [Reading, with Erdmann, nichtsterblich for nicht sterblich.] 

* \Umfang ihres R aunts."] 

8 [Raum.} * [gesammelten.] 



TABLE OF JUDGMENTS 109 

judgments we consider only two concepts, in the second 
two judgments, in the third several judgments in their relation 
to each other. The hypothetical proposition, 'If there is a 
perfect justice, the obstinately wicked are punished', really 
contains the relation of two propositions, namely, 'There is 
a perfect justice', and 'The obstinately wicked are punished'. 
Whether both these propositions are in themselves true, here 
remains undetermined. It is only the logical sequence which 
is thought by this judgment. Finally, the disjunctive judgment B 99 
contains a relation of two or more propositions to each other, 
a relation not, however, of logical sequence, but of logical 
opposition, in so far as the sphere of the one excludes the 
sphere of the other, and yet at the same time of community, 
in so far as the propositions taken together occupy the whole 
sphere of the knowledge in question. The disjunctive judg- 
ment expresses, therefore, a relation of the parts of the sphere A 74 
of such knowledge, since the sphere of each part is a com- 
plement of the sphere of the others, yielding together the 
sum-total of the divided knowledge. Take, for instance, the 
judgment, 'The world exists either through blind chance, 
or through inner necessity, or through an external cause'. 
Each of these propositions occupies a part of the sphere of 
the possible knowledge concerning the existence of a world in 
general; all of them together occupy the whole sphere. To 
take the knowledge out of one of these spheres means placing 
it in one of the other spheres, and to place it in one sphere 
means taking it out of the others. There is, therefore, in a 
disjunctive judgment a certain community of the known 
constituents, such that they mutually exclude each other, 
and yet thereby determine in their totality the true know- 
ledge. For, when taken together, they constitute the whole 
content of one given knowledge. This is all that need here 
be considered, so far as concerns what follows. 

4. The modality of judgments is a quite peculiar function. 
Its distinguishing characteristic is that it contributes nothing B 100 
to the content of the judgment (for, besides quantity, quality, 
and relation, there is nothing that constitutes the content of 
a judgment), but concerns only the value of the copula in 
relation to thought in general. Problematic judgments are 
those in which affirmation or negation is taken as merely 



no KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

A 75 possible (optional). In assertoric judgments affirmation or 
negation is viewed as real (true), and in apodeictic judgments 
as necessary. a Thus the two judgments, the relation of which 
constitutes the hypothetical judgment (antecedens et con- 
sequens), and likewise the judgments the reciprocal relation 
of which forms the disjunctive judgment (members of the 
division), are one and all problematic only. In the above 
example, the proposition, 'There is a perfect justice', is not 
stated assertorically, but is thought only as an optional judg- 
ment, which it is possible to assume; it is only the logical 
sequence which is assertoric. Such judgments may therefore 
be obviously false, and yet, taken problematically, may be con- 
ditions of the knowledge of truth. Thus the judgment, 'The 
world exists by blind chance', has in the disjunctive judgment 
only problematic meaning, namely, as a proposition that may 
B ioi for a moment be assumed. At the same time, like the indica- 
tion of a false road among the number of all those roads that 
can be taken, it aids in the discovery of the true proposition. 
The problematic proposition is therefore that which expresses 
only logical (which is not objective) possibility a free choice 
of admitting such a proposition, and a purely optional 
admission of it into the understanding. The assertoric pro- 
position deals with logical reality or truth. Thus, for instance, 

A 76 in a hypothetical syllogism the antecedent is in the major 
premiss problematic, in the minor assertoric, and what the 
syllogism shows is that the consequence follows in accordance 
with the laws of the understanding. The apodeictic proposi- 
tion thinks the assertoric as determined by these laws of the 
understanding, and therefore as affirming a priori\ and in 
this manner it expresses logical necessity. Since everything 
is thus incorporated in the understanding step by step inas- 
much as we first judge something problematically, then 
maintain its truth assertorically, and finally affirm it as in- 
separably united with the understanding, that is, as necessary 
and apodeictic we are justified in regarding these three 
functions of modality as so many moments of thought. 

Just as if thought were in the problematic a function of the 
understanding; in the assertoric, of the faculty of judgment; in 
the apodeictic, of reason. This is a remark which will be explained 
in the sequel. 



TABLE OF CATEGORIES in 



THE CLUE TO THE DISCOVERY OF ALL PURE B 102 
CONCEPTS OF THE UNDERSTANDING 

Section 3 
io 1 

THE PURE CONCEPTS OF THE UNDERSTANDING, OR 
CATEGORIES 

General logic, as has been repeatedly said, abstracts from 
all content of knowledge, and looks to some other source, 
whatever that may be, for the representations which it is 
to transform into concepts by process of analysis. Tran- 
scendental logic, on the other hand, has lying before it a mani- 
fold of a priori sensibility, presented by transcendental aes- A 77 
thetic, as material for the concepts of pure understanding. 
In the absence of this material those concepts would be 2 with- 
out any content, therefore entirely empty. Space and time 
contain a manifold of pure a priori intuition, but at the same 
time are conditions of the receptivity of our mind conditions 
under" which alone it can receive representations of objects, and 
which therefore must also always affect the concept of these 
objects. But if this manifold is to be known, the spontaneity 
of our thought requires that it be gone through in a certain 
way, taken up, and connected. This act I name synthesis, 

By synthesis, in its most general sense, I understand the B 103 
act of putting different representations together, and of grasp- 
ing 3 what is manifold in them in one [act of] knowledge. Such 
a synthesis \spure, if the manifold is not empirical but is given 
a priori, as is the manifold in space and time. Before we can 
analyse our representations, the representations must them- 
selves be given, and therefore as regards content no concepts 
can first arise by way of analysis. Synthesis of a manifold (be 
it given empirically or a priori) is what first gives rise to know- 
ledge. This knowledge may, indeed, at first, be crude and con- 
fused, and therefore in need of analysis. Still the synthesis is 
that which gathers the elements for knowledge, and unites 
them to [form] a certain content. 4 It is to synthesis, therefore, A 78 

1 [" 10" added in B.] 2 [Reading, with v. Leclair, wurden for wurde.] 

3 \begreif en ^\ 4 \und zu einem gewissen Inhalte vereinigtl\ 



H2 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

that we must first direct our attention, if we would determine 
the first origin of our knowledge. 

Synthesis in general, as we shall hereafter see, is the mere 
result of the power of imagination, a blind but indispensable 
function of the soul, without which we should have no know- 
ledge whatsoever, but of which we are scarcely ever conscious. 
To bring this synthesis to concepts is a function which belongs 
to the understanding, and it is through this function of the 
understanding that we first obtain knowledge properly so 
called. 

B 104 Pure synthesis, represented in its most general aspect ', gives 
us the pure concept of the understanding. By this pure syn- 
thesis I understand that which rests upon a basis of a priori 
synthetic unity. Thus our counting, as is easily seen in the case 
of larger numbers, is a synthesis according to concepts, be- 
cause it is executed according to a common ground of unity, 
as, for instance, the decade. In terms of this concept, the unity 
of the synthesis of the manifold is rendered necessary. 

By means of analysis different representations are brought 
under one concept a procedure treated of in general logic. 
What transcendental logic, on the other hand, teaches, i^how 
we bring to concepts, not representations, but the pure syn- 
thesis of representations. What must first be given with a 
view to the a priori knowledge of all objects is the manifold 
A 79 of pure intuition; the second factor involved is the synthesis of 
this manifold by means of the imagination. But even this does 
not yet yield knowledge. The concepts which give unity to this 
pure synthesis, and which consist solely in the representation 
of this necessary synthetic unity, furnish the third requisite for 
the knowledge of an object; and they rest on the under- 
standing. 

The same function which gives unity to the various repre- 
sentations in a judgment also gives unity to the mere syn- 

B 105 thesis of various representations in an intuition] and this 
unity, in its most general expression, we entitle the pure con- 
cept of the understanding. The same understanding, through 
the same operations by which in concepts, by means of ana- 
lytical unity, it produced the logical form of a judgment, 
also introduces a transcendental content into its representa- 
tions, by means of the synthetic unity of the manifold in intui- 



TABLE OF CATEGORIES 113 

tion in general. On this account we are entitled to call these 
representations pure concepts of the understanding, and to 
regard them as "applying a priori to objects a conclusion 
which general logic is not in a position to establish. 

In this manner there arise precisely the same number of 
pure concepts of the understanding which apply a priori to 
objects of intuition in general, as, in the preceding table, there 
have been found to be logical functions in all possible judg- 
ments. For these functions specify the understanding com- 
pletely, and yield an exhaustive inventory of its powers. These 
concepts we shall, with Aristotle, call categories, for our A 80 
primary purpose is the same as his, although widely diverging 
from it in manner of execution. 

TABLE OF CATEGORIES B 106 

I 

Of Quantity 
Unity 
Plurality 
Totality 

II III 

Of Quality Of Relation 

Reality Of Inherence and Subsistence 

Negation (substantia et accidens) 

Limitation Of Causality and Dependence 

(cause and effect) 
Of Community (reciprocity 
between agent and patient) 

IV 

Of Modality 

Possibility I mpossibility 
Existence Non-existence 
Necessity Contingency 

This then is the list of all original pure concepts of syn- 
thesis that the understanding contains within itself a priori. 

I 



114 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

Indeed, it is because it contains these concepts that it is 
called pure understanding; for by them alone can it under- 
stand anything in the manifold of intuition," that is, think an 
object of intuition. This division is developed systematically 

A 81 from a common principle, namely, the faculty of judgment 
(which is the same as the faculty of thought). It has not arisen 
rhapsodically, as the result of a haphazard search after pure 
concepts, the complete enumeration of which, as based on 

B 107 induction only, could never be guaranteed. Nor could we, if 
this were our procedure, discover why just these concepts, and 
no others, have their seat in the pure understanding. It was 
an enterprise worthy of an acute thinker like Aristotle to make 
search for these fundamental concepts. But as he did so on no 
principle, he merely picked them up as they came his way, 
and at first procured ten of them, which he called categories 
(predicaments). Afterwards he believed that he had discovered 
five others, which he added under the name of post-predica- 
ments. But his table still remained defective. Besides, there 
are to be found in it some modes of pure sensibility (quando&gt; 
ubi, situs, alsoprms, simul), and an empirical concept (motus), 
none of which have any place in a table of the concepts that 
trace their origin to the understanding. Aristotle's list also 
enumerates among the original concepts some derivative con- 
cepts (actio, passio)\ and of the original concepts some are 
entirely lacking. 

In this connection, it is to be remarked that the categories, 
as the true primary concepts of the pure understanding, have 
also their pure derivative concepts. These could not be passed 
over in a complete system of transcendental philosophy, but 
A 82 in a merely critical essay the simple mention of the fact may 
suffice. 

B 108 I beg permission to entitle these pure but derivative con- 
cepts of the understanding the predicables of the pure under- 
standing to distinguish them from the predicaments [i.e. the 
categories]. If we have the original and primitive concepts, it 
is easy to add the derivative and subsidiary, and so to give a 
complete picture of the family tree of the [concepts of] pure 
understanding. Since at present we are concerned not with the 
completeness of the system, but only with the principles to be 
followed in its construction, I reserve this supplementary work 



TABLE OF CATEGORIES 115 

for another occasion. It can easily be carried out, with the 
aid of the ontological manuals for instance, by placing under 
the category of causality the predicables of force, action, 
passion; under the category of community the predicables 
of presence, resistance; under the predicaments of modality 
the predicables of coming to be, ceasing to be, change, etc. 
The categories, when combined with the modes of pure sen- 
sibility, or with one another, yield a large number of derivative 
a priori concepts. To note, and, where possible, to give a com- 
plete inventory of these concepts, would be a useful and not 
unpleasant task, but it is a task from which we can here be 
absolved. 

In this treatise, I purposely omit the definitions of the cate- 
gories, although I may be in possession of them. I shall pro- A 83 
ceed to analyse these concepts only so far as is necessary in 
connection with the doctrine of method which I am propound- B 109 
ing. In a system of pure reason, definitions of the categories 
would rightly be demanded, but in this treatise they would 
merely divert attention from the main object of the enquiry, 
arousing doubts and objections which, without detriment to 
what is essential to our purposes, can very well be reserved for 
another occasion. Meanwhile, from the little that I have said, 
it will be obvious that a complete glossary, with all the requisite 
explanations, is not only a possible, but an easy task. The divi- 
sions are provided; all that is required is to fill them; and a 
systematic 'topic', such as that here given, affords sufficient 
guidance as to the proper location of each concept, while at 
the same time indicating which divisions are still empty. 



This table of categories suggests some nice points, which 
may perhaps have important consequences in regard to the 
scientific form of all modes of knowledge obtainable by reason. 
For that this table is extremely useful in the theoretical part of 
philosophy, and indeed is indispensable as supplying the com- 
plete plan of a whole science, so far as that science rests on a 
priori concepts, and as dividing it systematically 2 according to 

1 [The whole of sections II and 12 added in B.] 
2 [Reading, with Vaihinger, systematise h for mathematisch.} 



n6 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

determinate principles, is already evident from the fact that 
the table contains all the elementary concepts of the under- 
standing in their completeness, nay, even the form of a system 

B no of them in the human understanding^ and accordingly indi- 
cates all the momenta of a projected speculative science, and 
even their order } as I have elsewhere * shown. 

The first of the considerations suggested by the table is 
that while it contains four classes of the concepts of under- 
standing, it may, in the first instance, be divided into two 
groups; those in the first group being concerned with objects 
of intuition, pure as well as empirical, those in the second 
group with the existence of these objects, in their relation 
either to each other or to the understanding. 

The categories in the first group I would entitle the mathe- 
matical, those in the second group the dynamical. The former 
have no correlates; these are to be met with only in the second 
group. This distinction must have some ground in the nature 
of the understanding. 

Secondly, in view of the fact that all a priori division of 
concepts must be by dichotomy, it is significant that in each 
class the number of the categories is always the same, nafnely, 
three. Further, it may be observed that the third category in 
each class always arises from the combination of the second 
category with the first. 

Bin Thus allness or totality is just plurality considered as unity; 
limitation is simply reality combined with negation; commun- 
ity is the causality of substances reciprocally determining one 
another; lastly, necessity is just the existence which is given 
through possibility itself. It must not be supposed, however, 
that the third category is therefore merely a derivative, and 
not a primary, concept of the pure understanding. For the com- 
bination of the first and second concepts, in order that the third 
may be produced, requires a special act of the understand- 
ing, which is not identical with that which is exercised in the 
case of the first and the second. Thus the concept of a number 
(which belongs to the category of totality) is not always possible 
simply upon the presence of concepts of plurality and unity 

* Metaphysical First Principles of Natural Science. [In the 
Introduction by which Kant prefaces this treatise.] 



TABLE OF CATEGORIES 117 

(for instance, in the representation of the infinite); nor can I, 
by simply combining the concept of a cause and that of a sub- 
stance, at once have understanding of influence, that is, how a 
substance can be the cause of something in another substance. 
Obviously in these cases, a separate act of the understanding 
is demanded; and similarly in the others. 

Thirdly, in the case of one category, namely, that of com- 
munity, which is found in the third group, its accordance with 
the form of a disjunctive judgment the form which corre- B 112 
sponds to it in the table of logical functions is not as evident 
as in the case of the others. 

To gain assurance that they do actually accord, we must 
observe that in all disjunctive judgments the sphere (that is, 
the multiplicity which is contained in any one judgment) is 
represented as a whole divided into parts (the subordinate con- 
cepts), and that since no one of them can be contained under 
any other, they are thought as co-ordinated with, not sub- 
ordinated to, each other, and so as determining each other, 
not in one direction only, as in a series, but reciprocally, as in 
an aggregate 1 if one member of the division is posited, all 
the rfcst are excluded, and conversely. 

Now in a whole which is made up of things, a similar com- 
bination is being thought; for one thing is not subordinated, 
as effect, to another, as cause of its existence, but, simultane- 
ously and reciprocally, is co-ordinated with it, as cause of the 
determination of the other (as, for instance, in a body the 
parts of which reciprocally attract and repel each other). This 
is a quite different kind of connection from that which is found 
in the mere relation of cause to effect (of ground to conse- 
quence), for in the latter relation the consequence does not in 
its turn reciprocally determine the ground, and therefore does 
not constitute with it a whole thus the world, for instance, 
does not with its Creator serve to constitute a whole. 2 The 
procedure which the understanding follows in representing to B 113 
itself the sphere of a divided concept it likewise follows when 
it thinks a thing as divisible; and just as, in the former case, 
the members of a division exclude each other, and yet are com- 



2 [Reading, with Vaihinger, die Welt mil dem Wcltschopfer for der Welt- 
schopfer mil der Welt.} 



ii8 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

bined in one sphere, so the understanding represents to itself 
the parts of the latter as existing (as substances) in such a way 
that, while each exists independently of the others, they are 
yet combined together in one whole. 



12 

In the transcendental philosophy of the ancients there is 
included yet another chapter containing pure concepts of the 
understanding which, though not enumerated among the cate- 
gories, must, on their view, be ranked as a priori concepts of 
objects. This, however, would amount to an increase in the 
number of the categories, and is therefore not feasible. They 
are propounded in the proposition, so famous among the 
Schoolmen, quodlibet ens est unum, verum, bonum. Now, 
although the application of this principle has proved very 
meagre in consequences, and has indeed yielded only proposi- 
tions that are tautological, and therefore in recent times has 
retained its place in metaphysics almost by courtesy only, yet, 
on the other hand, it represents a view which, however empty 
it may seem to be, has maintained itself over this very Jong 
period. It therefore deserves to be investigated in respect of 
its origin, and we are justified in conjecturing that it has its 
ground in some rule of the understanding which, as often 
happens, has only been wrongly interpreted. These supposedly 
B 114 transcendental predicates of things are, in fact, nothing but 
logical requirements and criteria of all knowledge of things in 
general, and prescribe for such knowledge the categories of 
quantity, namely, unity, plurality, and totality. But these 
categories, which, properly regarded, must be taken as material, 
belonging to the possibility of the things themselves [empirical 
objects], have, in this further application, been used only in 
their formal meaning, as being of the nature of logical requis- 
ites of all knowledge, and yet at the same time have been 
incautiously converted from being criteria of thought to be pro- 
perties of things in themselves. In all knowledge of an object 
there is unity of concept, which may be entitled qualitative 
unity y so far as we think by it only the unity in the combination 
of the manifold of our knowledge: as, for example, the unity 
of the theme in a play, a speech, or a story. Secondly, there is 



TABLE OF CATEGORIES 119 

truth) in respect of its consequences. The greater the number 
of true consequences that follow from a given concept, the 
more criteria are. there of its objective reality. This might be 
entitled the qualitative plurality 'of characters, which belong to 
a concept as to a common ground (but are not thought in it, as 
quantity). Thirdly, and lastly, there \s perfection^ which con- 
sists in this, that the plurality together leads back to the unity 
of the concept, and accords completely with this and with no 
other concept. This may be entitled the qualitative complete- 
ness (totality). Hence it is evident that these logical criteria of B 115 
the possibility of knowledge in general are the three categories 
of quantity, in which the unity in the production of the quantum 
has to be taken as homogeneous throughout; and that these 
categories are here being transformed so as also to yield con- 
nection of heterogeneous knowledge in one consciousness, by 
means of the quality of the knowledge as the principle of the 
connection. Thus the criterion of the possibility of a concept 
(not of an object) is the definition of it, in which the unity of 
the concept, the truth of all that may be immediately deduced 
from it, and finally, the completeness of what has been thus de- 
duce^ from it, yield all that is required for the construction of 
the whole concept. Similarly, the criterion of an hypothesis 
consists in the intelligibility of the assumed ground of explana- 
tion, that is, 1 in its unity (without any auxiliary hypothesis); 
in the truth of the consequences that can be deduced from it 
(their accordance with themselves and with experience); and 
finally, in the completeness of the ground of explanation of 
these consequences, which carry us back to neither more nor 
less than was assumed in the hypothesis, and so in an a pos- 
teriori analytic manner give us back and accord with what 
has previously been thought in a synthetic a priori manner. 
We have not, therefore, in the concepts of unity, truth, and per- 
fection, made any addition to the transcendental table of the 
categories, as if it were in any respect imperfect. All that we 
have done is to bring the employment of these concepts under 
general logical rules, for the agreement of knowledge with 
itself the question of their relation to objects not being in any B 116 
way under discussion. 

1 [Taking oder as equivalent to 'that is', and not as expressing an alternative.] 



A 84 THE ANALYTIC OF CONCEPTS l 

CHAPTER II 

THE DEDUCTION OF THE PURE CONCEPTS OF 
UNDERSTANDING 

Section I 

I3 2 
THE PRINCIPLES OF ANY TRANSCENDENTAL DEDUCTION 

JURISTS, when speaking of rights and claims, distinguish in a 
legal action the question of right (quid juris) from the question 
of fact (quid factf)\ and they demand that both be proved. 
Proof of the former, which has to state the right or the legal 
claim, they entitle the deduction. Many empirical concepts are 
employed without question from anyone. Since experience is 
always available for the proof of their objective reality, we be- 
lieve ourselves, even without a deduction, to be justified in ap- 

B 117 propriating to them a meaning, an ascribed 8 significance. But 
there are also usurpatory concepts, such as fortune, fate, 
which, though allowed to circulate by almost universal indul- 
gence, are yet from time to time challenged by the question: 
quid juris. This demand for a deduction involves us in con- 

A 85 siderable perplexity, no clear legal title, sufficient to justify 
their* employment, being obtainable either from experience or 
from reason. 

Now among the manifold concepts which form the highly 

1 [Following Michaelis, in substituting this heading for the heading in A 
and B, Der trans zcendentakn Analytik. Cf. above p. 104.] 
8 [" 13" added in B.] 
3 [Reading, as in A and B, eingebildete. Vaihinger suggests instead eine 

.] 
[Reading, with Erdmann, ihres for seines.] 

120 



TRANSCENDENTAL DEDUCTION 121 

complicated web of human knowledge, there are some which 
are marked out for pure a priori employment, in complete in- 
dependence of .11 experience; and their right to be so em- 
ployed always demands a deduction. For since empirical proofs 
do not suffice to justify this kind of employment, we are faced 
by the problem how these concepts can relate to objects which 
they yet do not obtain from any experience. The explanation 
of the manner in which concepts can thus relate a priori to 
objects I entitle their transcendental deduction; and from it I 
distinguish empirical deduction, which shows the manner in 
which a concept is acquired through experience and through 
reflection upon experience, and which therefore concerns, not 
its legitimacy, but only its de facto mode of origination. 

We are already in possession of concepts which are of two B 118 
quite different kinds, and which yet agree in that they relate 
to objects in a completely a priori manner, namely, the con- 
cepts of space and time as forms of sensibility, and the cate- 
gories as concepts of understanding. To seek an empirical de- 
duction of either of these types of concept would be labour 
entirely lost. For their distinguishing feature consists just in 
this, t that they relate to their objects without having borrowed A 86 
from experience anything that can serve in the representation 
of these objects. If, therefore, a deduction of such concepts is 
indispensable, it must in any case be transcendental. 

We can, however, with regard to these concepts, as with 
regard to all knowledge, seek to discover in experience, if 
not the principle of their possibility, at least the occasioning 
causes 1 of their production. The impressions of the senses 
supplying the first stimulus, 2 the whole faculty of knowledge 
opens out to them, and experience is brought into exist- 
ence. That experience contains two very dissimilar elements, 
namely, the matter of knowledge [obtained] from the senses, 
and a certain form for the ordering of this matter, [obtained] 
from the inner source 3 of the pure intuition and thought 
which, on occasion of the sense-impressions, are first brought 
into action and yield concepts. Such an investigation of the 
first strivings of our faculty of knowledge, whereby it advances 
from particular perceptions to universal concepts, is un- B 119 
doubtedly of great service. We are indebted to the celebrated 

1 \Gelegenheitsursachen^\ a [Anlass.] z [aus dem inneren Quell.} 



122 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

Locke for opening out this new line of enquiry. But a deduc- 
tion of the pure a priori concepts can never be obtained in 
this manner; it is not to be looked for in any. such direction. 
For in view of their subsequent employment, which has to be 
entirely independent of experience, the must be in a position 
to show a certificate of birth quite other than that of descent 

A 8 7 from experiences. Since this attempted physiological deriva- 
tion concerns a quaestio facti, it cannot strictly be called 
deduction; and I shall therefore entitle it the explanation of 
the possession of pure knowledge. Plainly the only deduction 
that can be given of this l knowledge is one that is transcen- 
dental, not empirical. In respect to pure a priori concepts 
the latter type of deduction is an utterly useless enterprise 
which can be engaged in only by those who have failed to 
grasp the quite peculiar nature of these modes of know- 
ledge. 

But although it may be admitted that the only kind of 
deduction of pure a priori knowledge which is possible is on 
transcendental lines, it is not at once obvious that a deduc- 
tion is indispensably necessary. We have already, by means of 
a transcendental deduction, traced the concepts of space^and 
time to their sources, and have explained and determined 
B 120 their a priori objective validity. Geometry, however, proceeds 
with security in knowledge that is completely a priori ', and has 
no need to beseech philosophy for any certificate of the pure 
and legitimate descent of its fundamental concept of space. 
But the concept is employed in this science only in its reference 
to the outer sensible world of the intuition of which space 
is the pure form where all geometrical knowledge, grounded 
as it is in a priori intuition, possesses immediate evidence. 
The objects, so far as their form is concerned, are given, 

A 88 through the very knowledge of them, a priori in intuition. 
In the case of the pure concepts of understanding, it is quite 
otherwise; it is with them that the unavoidable demand for a 
transcendental deduction, not only of themselves, but also 
of the concept of space, first originates. For since they speak 
of * objects through predicates not of intuition and sensibility 
but of pure a priori thought, they relate to objects universally, 

1 [Reading, with Erdmann, dieser es allein for diesen allein es.] 
* [Reading, with Hartenstein, reden for redet.} 



TRANSCENDENTAL DEDUCTION 123 

that is, apart from all conditions of sensibility. Also, 1 not being 
grounded in experience, they cannot, in a priori intuition, 
exhibit any object such as might, prior to all experience, 
serve as ground for their synthesis. For these reasons, they 
arouse suspicion not * merely in regard to the objective 
validity and the limits of their own employment, but owing 
to their tendency to employ the concept of space beyond the 
conditions of sensible intuition, that concept also they render 
ambiguous; and this, indeed, is why we have already found B 121 
a transcendental deduction of it necessary. The reader must 
therefore be convinced of the unavoidable necessity of such 
a transcendental deduction before he has taken a single step 
in the field of pure reason. Otherwise he proceeds blindly, 
and after manifold wanderings must come back to the same 
ignorance from which he started. At the same time, if he is 
not to lament over obscurity in matters which are by their 
very nature deeply veiled, or to be too easily discouraged 2 in 
the removal of obstacles, he must have a clear foreknowledge 
of the inevitable difficulty of the undertaking. For we must A 89 
either completely surrender all claims to make judgments of 
pure reason in 3 the most highly esteemed of all fields, that 
which transcends the limits of all possible experience, or else 
bring this critical enquiry to completion. 

We have already been able with but little difficulty to 
explain how the concepts of space and time, although a priori 
modes of knowledge, must necessarily relate to objects, and 
how independently of all experience they make 4 possible a 
synthetic knowledge of objects. For since only by means of 
such pure forms of sensibility can an object appear to us, 
and so be an object of empirical intuition, space and time 
are pure intuitions which contain a priori the condition of the 
possibility of objects as appearances, and the synthesis which B 122 
takes place in them has objective validity. 

The categories of understanding, on the other hand, do 
not represent the conditions under which objects are given 
in intuition. Objects may, therefore, appear to us without 

1 [Reading, with Erdmann, und sie, da sie for und die, da ste.] 

1 [Reading, with Hartenstein, werde for werden,] 

8 [Reading, with Erdmann, ah auf das for als das.] 

4 [Reading, with Erdmann, machcn for machten.] 



124 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

their being under the necessity of being related to the functions 
of understanding; and understanding need not, therefore, 
contain their a priori conditions. Thus a difficulty such as 
we did not meet with in the field of sensibility is here 
presented, namely, how subjective conditions of thought can 
have objective validity, that is, can furnish conditions of the 

A 90 possibility of all knowledge of objects. For appearances can 
certainly be given in intuition independently of functions of 
the understanding. Let us take, for instance, the concept of 
cause, which signifies a special kind of synthesis, whereby 
upon something, A, there is posited something quite different, 
B, according to a rule. It is not manifest a priori why appear- 
ances should contain anything of this kind (experiences 
cannot be cited in its proof, for what has to be established 
is the objective validity of a concept that is a priori}] and it 
is therefore a priori doubtful whether such a concept be 
not perhaps altogether empty, and have no object anywhere 
among appearances. That objects of sensible intuition must 
B 123 conform to the formal conditions of sensibility which lie 
a priori in the mind is evident, because otherwise they would 
not be objects for us. But that they must likewise conform 
to the conditions which the understanding requires for the 
synthetic unity 1 of thought, is a conclusion the grounds of 
which are by no means so obvious. Appearances might very 
well be so constituted that the understanding should not find 
them to be in accordance with the conditions of its unity. 
Everything might be in such confusion that, for instance, 
in the series of appearances nothing presented itself which 
might yield a rule of synthesis and so answer to the concept 
of cause and effect. This concept would then be altogether 
empty, null, and meaningless. But since intuition stands in 

A 91 no need whatsoever of the functions of thought, appearances 
would none the less present objects to our intuition. 

If we thought to escape these toilsome enquiries by saying 
that experience continually presents examples of such regu- 
larity among appearances and so affords abundant oppor- 
tunity of abstracting the concept of cause, and at the same 
time of verifying the objective validity of such a concept, we 
should be overlooking the fact that the concept of cause can 

1 [Reading, with v. Leclair, Einheit for Einsicht^\ 



TRANSCENDENTAL DEDUCTION 125 

never arise in this manner. It must either be grounded com- 
pletely a priori in the understanding, or must be entirely given 
up as a mere phantom of the brain. For this concept makes B 124 
strict demand that something, A, should be such that some- 
thing else, B, follows from it necessarily and in accordance 
with an absolutely universal rule. Appearances do indeed pre- 
sent cases from which a rule can be obtained according to 
which something usually happens, but they never prove the 
sequence 1 to be necessary. To the synthesis of cause and 
effect there belongs a dignity which cannot be empirically 
expressed, namely, that the effect not only succeeds upon the 
cause, but that it is posited through it and arises out of it. 2 
This strict universality of the rule is never a characteristic of 
empirical rules; they can acquire through induction only com- 
parative universality, that is, extensive applicability. If we A 92 
were to treat pure concepts of understanding as merely em- 
pirical products, we should be making a complete change in 
[the manner of] their employment. 

i4 3 



Transition to the Transcendental Deduction of the 
Categories 

There are only two possible ways in which synthetic re- 
presentations 4 and their objects 5 can establish connection, 
obtain necessary relation to one another, and, as it were, meet 
one another. Either the object alone must make the repre- 
sentation possible, or the representation alone must make the 
object possible. In the former case, this relation is only em- B 125 
pirical, and the representation is never possible a priori. This 
is true of appearances, 6 as regards that [element] in them 
which belongs to sensation. In the latter case, representation 
in itself does not produce its object in so far as existence is 
concerned, for we are not here speaking of its causality by 
means of the will. None the less the representation is a priori 
determinant of the object, if it be the case that only through 

1 [Erfolg] * [aus ihr erfolgr^ 

8 [" 14", inadvertently omitted in B, added in 3rd edition.] 

4 [Reading, with Erdmann, Vorstellungen for Vorstcllung.\ 

5 [Gegenstdnde.] 

6 [Reading, with Grillo, Erscheinungen for Erscheinung.] 



126 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

the representation is it possible to know anything as an object. 
Now there are two conditions under which alone the know- 
ledge of an object is possible, first, intuition^ through which 
it is given, though only as appearance; secondly, concept, 

A 93 through which an object is thought corresponding to this in- 
tuition. It is evident from the above that the first condition, 
namely, that under which alone objects can be intuited, does 
actually lie 1 a priori in the mind as the formal ground of the 
objects. 2 All appearances necessarily agree with this formal 
condition of sensibility, since only through it can they appear, 
that is, be empirically intuited and given. The question now 
arises whether a priori concepts do not also serve as ante- 
cedent conditions under which alone anything can be, if not 
intuited, yet thought as object in general. In that case all em- 
B 126 pirical knowledge of objects would necessarily conform to such 
concepts, because only as thus presupposing them is anything 
possible as object of experience. Now all experience does indeed 
contain, in addition to the intuition of the senses through 
which something is given, a concept of an object as being 
thereby given, that is to say, as appearing. Concepts of objects 
in general thus underlie all empirical knowledge as its a priori 
conditions. The objective validity of the categories as a priori 
concepts rests, therefore, on the fact that, so far as the form 
of thought is concerned, through them alone does experience 
become possible. They relate of necessity and a priori to 
objects of experience, for the reason that only by means of 
them can any object whatsoever of experience be thought. 

A 94 The transcendental deduction of all a priori concepts has 
thus a principle according to which the whole enquiry must 
be directed, namely, that they must be recognised as a priori 
conditions of the possibility of experience, 3 alike of the in- 
tuition which is to be met with in it and of the thought. Con- 
cepts which yield the objective ground of the possibility of 
experience are for this very reason necessary. But the unfold- 
ing 4 of the experience wherein they are encountered is not 
their deduction; it is only their illustration. For on any such 

1 [Reading, with Kehrbach, liegt for liegen.} 

8 [Objekten. Here, as elsewhere, Kant employs Objekt and Gegenstand as 
equivalent terms.] 

3 [Reading, with Erdmann, Erfahrung for Erfahrungen^\ 

4 [Entwicklung.} 



TRANSCENDENTAL DEDUCTION 127 

exposition they would be merely accidental. Save through 
their original relation to possible experience, in which all B 127 
objects of knowledge are found, 1 their relation to any one 
object would be quite .incomprehensible. 

* The illustrious Locke, failing to take account of these con- 
siderations, and meeting with pure concepts of the understand- 
ing in experience, deduced them also from experience, and 
yet proceeded so inconsequently that he attempted with their 
aid to obtain knowledge which far transcends all limits of ex- 
perience. David Hume recognised that, in order to be able to 
do this, it was necessary that these concepts should have an 
a priori origin. But since he could not explain how it can be 
possible that the understanding must think concepts, which 
are not in themselves connected in the understanding, as being 
necessarily connected in the object, and since it never occurred 
to him that the understanding might itself, perhaps, through 
these concepts, be the author of the experience in which its 
objects are found, he was constrained to derive them from 
experience, namely, from a subjective necessity (that is, from 
custom)^ which arises from repeated association in experience, 
and which comes mistakenly to be regarded as objective. But 
from these premisses he argued quite consistently. It is im- 
possible, he declared, with these concepts and the principles to 
which they give rise, to pass beyond the limits of experience. 

* [The next three paragraphs are substituted in B for the 
following:] 

There are three original sources (capacities or faculties of 
the soul) which contain the conditions of the possibility of all 
experience, and cannot themselves be derived from any other 
faculty of the mind, namely, sense, imagination, and appercep- 
tion. Upon them are grounded (i) the synopsis of the manifold 
a priori through sense; (2) the synthesis of this manifold 
through imagination; finally (3) the unity of this synthesis 
through original apperception. All these faculties have a 
transcendental (as well as an empirical) employment which 
concerns the form alone, and is possible a priori. As regards 
sense, 2 we have treated of this above in the first part; we shall A 95 
now endeavour to comprehend the nature of the other two. 

1 [vorfcommen.] a [in Ansehung der Sinne.] 



128 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

B 128 Now this empirical derivation, in which both philosophers 
agree, cannot be reconciled with the scientific a priori know- 
ledge which we do actually possess, namely, pure mathematics 
and general science of nature] and this fact therefore suffices 
to disprove such derivation. 

While the former of these two illustrious men opened a wide 
door to enthusiasm * for if reason once be allowed such rights, 
it will no longer allow itself to be kept within bounds by 
vaguely defined recommendations of moderation the other 
gave himself over entirely to scepticism, having, as he believed, 
discovered that what had hitherto been regarded as reason 
was but an all-prevalent illusion infecting our faculty of know- 
ledge. We now propose to make trial whether it be not possible 
to find for human reason safe conduct between these two rocks, 
assigning to her determinate limits, and yet keeping open for 
her the whole field of her appropriate activities. 

But first I shall introduce a word of explanation in regard 
to the categories. They are concepts of an object in general, by 
means of which the intuition of an object is regarded as deter- 
mined in respect of one of the logical functions of judgment. 
Thus the function of the categorical judgment is that of the 
relation of subject to predicate; for example, 'All bodies are 
divisible'. But as regards the merely logical employment of 
the understanding, it remains undetermined to which 2 of the 
two concepts the function of the subject, and to which the 

B 129 function of predicate, is to be assigned. For we can also say, 
'Something divisible is a body'. But when the concept of body 
is brought under the category of substance, it is thereby de- 
termined that its empirical intuition in experience must always 
be considered as subject and never as mere predicate. Simi- 
larly with all the other categories. 



1 [Schwdrmeret.] 
8 [Reading, with Grille, welchem for wclcher.] 



THE DEDUCTION OF THE PURE CONCEPTS OF 

UNDERSTANDING 1 

[as in 1st edition} 

Section 2 

THE A PRIORI GROUNDS OF THE POSSIBILITY OF 
EXPERIENCE 

THAT a concept, although itself neither contained in the con- 
cept of possible experience nor consisting of elements of a 
possible experience, should be produced completely a priori 
and Should relate to an object, is altogether contradictory and 
impossible. For it would then have no content, since no intui- 
tion corresponds to it; and intuitions in general, through which 
objects can be given to us, constitute the field, the whole ob- 
ject, of possible experience. An a priori concept which did not 
relate directly to experience would be only the logical form of 
a concept, not the concept itself through which something is 
thought. 

Pure a priori concepts, if such exist, cannot indeed con- 
tain anything empirical; yet, none the less, they can serve 
solely as a priori conditions of a possible experience. Upon 
this ground alone can their objective reality rest. 

If, therefore, we seek to discover how pure concepts of 
understanding are possible, we must enquire what are the 
a priori conditions upon which the possibility of experience A 96 
rests, and which remain as its underlying grounds when every- 
thing empirical is abstracted from appearances. A concept 
which universally and adequately expresses such a formal and 

1 [The Deduction, as here given, up to p. 150, was omitted in B. The Deduc- 
tion, as restated in B, is given below, pp. 151 to 175.] 

129 K 



130 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

objective condition of experience would be entitled a pure con- 
cept of understanding. Certainly, once I am in possession of 
pure concepts of understanding, I can think objects which may 
be impossible, or which, though perhaps in themselves possible, 
cannot be given in any experience. For in the connecting of 
these concepts something may be omitted which yet neces- 
sarily belongs to the condition of a possible experience (as in 
the concept of a spirit). Or, it may be, pure concepts are ex- 
tended further than experience can follow (as with the concept 
of God). But the elements of all modes of a priori knowledge, 
even of capricious and incongruous fictions, though they 
cannot, indeed, be derived from experience, since in that case 
they would not be knowledge a priori, must none the less 
always contain the pure a priori conditions of a possible ex- 
perience and of an empirical object. Otherwise nothing would 
be thought through them, and they themselves, being without 
data, could never arise even in thought. 

The concepts which thus contain a priori the pure thought 
involved in every experience, we find in the categories. If we 
A 97 can prove that by their means alone an object can be thought, 
this will be a sufficient deduction of them, and will justify their 
objective validity. But since in such a thought more than simply 
the faculty of thought, the understanding, is brought into play, 
and since this faculty itself, as a faculty of knowledge that is 
meant to relate to objects, calls for explanation in regard to the 
possibility of such relation, we must first of all consider, not in 
their empirical but in their transcendental constitution, the 
subjective sources which form the a priori foundation of the 
possibility of experience. 

If each representation were completely foreign to every 
other, standing apart in isolation, no such thing as knowledge 
would ever arise. For knowledge is [essentially] a whole in 
which representations stand compared and connected. As sense 
contains a manifold in its intuition, I ascribe to it a synopsis. 
But to such synopsis a synthesis must always correspond; re- 
ceptivity can make knowledge possible only when combined 
with spontaneity. Now this spontaneity is the ground of a 
threefold synthesis which must necessarily be found in all 
knowledge; namely, the apprehension of representations as 
modifications of the mind in intuition, their reproduction in 



TRANSCENDENTAL DEDUCTION (A) 131 

imagination, and their recognition in a concept. These point 
to three subjective sources of knowledge which make possible 
the understanding itself and consequently all experience as A 98 
its empirical product. , 

Preliminary Remark 

The deduction of the categories is a matter of such ex- 
treme difficulty, compelling us to penetrate so deeply into the 
first grounds of the possibility of our knowledge in general, 
that in order to avoid the elaborateness of a complete theory, 
and yet at the same time to omit nothing in so indispensable 
an enquiry, I have found it advisable in the four following pass- 
ages rather to prepare than to instruct the reader. System- 
atic exposition of these elements of the understanding is first 
given in Section 3, immediately following. The reader must 
not therefore be deterred by obscurities in these earlier sections. 
They are unavoidable in an enterprise never before attempted. 
They will, as I trust, in the section referred to, finally give way 
to complete insight. 

i . The Synthesis of Apprehension in Intuition 
Whatever the origin of our representations, whether they 
are due to the influence of outer things, or are produced 
through inner causes, whether they arise a priori, or being 
appearances have an empirical origin, they must all, as modi- 
fications of the mind, belong to inner sense. All our know- A 99 
ledge is thus finally subject to time, the formal condition of 
inner sense. In it they must all be ordered, connected, and 
brought into relation. This is a general observation which, 
throughout what follows, must be borne in mind as being 
quite fundamental. 

Every intuition contains in itself a manifold which can 
be represented as a manifold only in so far as the mind distin- 
guishes the time in the sequence of one impression upon another; 
for each representation, in so far as it is contained in a single 
moment, can never be anything but absolute unity. In order 
that unity of intuition may arise out of this manifold (as is 
required in the representation of space) it must first be run 
through, and held together. This act I name the synthesis of 
apprehension^ because it is directed upon intuition, which does 
indeed offer a manifold, but a manifold which can never be 



132 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

represented l as a manifold, and as contained in a single re- 
presentation, save in virtue of such a synthesis. 

This synthesis of apprehension must also be exercised 
a priori^ that is, in respect of representations which are not 
empirical. For without it we should never have a priori the 
representations either of space or of time. They can be pro- 
A 100 duced only through the synthesis of the manifold which sen- 
sibility presents in its original receptivity. We have thus a pure 
synthesis of apprehension. 

2. The Synthesis of Reproduction in Imagination 

It is a merely empirical law, that representations which 
have often followed or accompanied one another finally be- 
come associated, and so are set in a relation whereby, even in 
the absence of the object, one of these representations can, in 
accordance with a fixed rule, bring about a transition of the 
mind to the other. But this law of reproduction presupposes 
that appearances are themselves actually subject to such a 
rule, and that in the manifold of these 2 representations a co- 
existence or sequence takes place in conformity with certain 
rules. Otherwise our empirical imagination would never find 
opportunity for exercise appropriate to its powers, and so 
would remain concealed within the mind as a dead and to us 
unknown faculty. If cinnabar were sometimes red, sometimes 
black, sometimes light, sometimes heavy, if a man changed 
sometimes into this and sometimes into that animal form, if 
the country on the longest day were sometimes covered with 
A 101 fruit, sometimes with ice and snow, my empirical imagina- 
tion would never find opportunity when representing red 
colour to bring to mind heavy cinnabar. Nor could there be 
an empirical synthesis of reproduction, if a certain name were 
sometimes given to this, sometimes to that object, or were one 
and the same thing named sometimes in one way, sometimes 
in another, independently of any rule to which appearances 
are in themselves subject. 

There must then be something which, as the a priori 
ground of a necessary synthetic unity of appearances, makes 
their reproduction possible. What that something is we 

1 [Adding, with Vaihinger, vorzustellen after enthalten.} 
* [ihrer.] 



TRANSCENDENTAL DEDUCTION (A) 133 

soon discover, when we reflect that appearances are not 
things in themselves, but are the mere play of our representa- 
tions, and in the'end reduce to determinations of inner sense. 
For if we can show that even our purest a priori intuitions 
yield no knowledge, save in so far as they contain a com- 
bination of the manifold such as renders a thoroughgoing 
synthesis of reproduction possible, then this synthesis of im- 
agination is likewise grounded, antecedently to all experi- 
ence, upon a priori principles; and we must assume a pure 
transcendental synthesis of imagination as conditioning the 
very possibility of all experience. For experience as such neces- 
sarily presupposes the reproducibility of appearances. When A 102 
I seek to draw * a line in thought, or to think of the time from 
one noon to another, or even to represent to myself some par- 
ticular number, obviously the various manifold representa- 
tions that are involved must be apprehended by me in thought 
one after the other. But if I were always to drop out of thought 
the preceding representations (the first parts of the line, the 
antecedent parts of the time period, or the units in the order 
represented), and did not reproduce them while advancing to 
those that follow, a complete representation would never be 
obtained: none of the above-mentioned thoughts, not even the 
purest and most elementary representations of space and time, 
could arise. 

The synthesis of apprehension is thus inseparably bound 
up with the synthesis of reproduction. And as the former con- 
stitutes the transcendental ground of the possibility of all 
modes of knowledge whatsoever of those that are pure 
a priori no less than of those that are empirical the repro- 
ductive synthesis of the imagination is to be counted among 
the transcendental acts of the mind. We shall therefore entitle 
this faculty the transcendental faculty of imagination. 

3. The Synthesis of Recognition in a Concept A I0 3 

If we were not conscious that what we think is the same 
as what we thought a moment before, all reproduction in the 
series of representations would be useless. For it would in its 
present state be a new representation which would not in any 
way belong to the act whereby it was to be gradually gener- 

1 [Reading, with Erdmann, ziehen for **&gt;*.] 



134 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

ated. The manifold of the representation would never, there- 
fore, form a whole, since it would lack that unity which only 
consciousness can impart to it. If, in counting, I forget that 
the units, which now hover before me, 1 have been added to 
one another in succession, I should never know that a total 
is being produced through this successive addition of unit to 
unit, and so would remain ignorant of the number. For the 
concept of the number is nothing but the consciousness of 
this unity of synthesis. 

The word 'concept' 2 might of itself suggest this remark. 
For this unitary consciousness 3 is what combines the mani- 
fold, successively intuited, and thereupon also reproduced, 
into one representation. This consciousness may often be only 
faint, so that we do not connect it with 4 the act itself, that 
is, not in any direct manner with the generation of the repre- 
A 104 sentation, but only with the outcome [that which is thereby 
represented]. But notwithstanding these variations, such con- 
sciousness, however indistinct, must always be present; with- 
out it, concepts, and therewith knowledge of objects, are 
altogether impossible. 

At this point we must make clear to ourselves what we 
mean by the expression 'an object of representations'. We 
have stated above that appearances are themselves nothing 
but sensible representations, which, as such and in themselves, 
must not be taken as objects capable of existing outside our 
power of representation. What, then, is to be understood when 
we speak of an object corresponding to, and consequently 
also distinct from, our knowledge? It is easily seen that this 
object must be thought only as something in general = x, since 
outside our knowledge we have nothing which we could set 
over against this knowledge as corresponding to it. 

Now we find that our thought of the relation of all know- 
ledge to its object carries with it an element of necessity; the 
object is viewed as that which prevents our modes of know- 
ledge from being haphazard or arbitrary, and which deter- 
mines them a priori in some definite fashion. For in so far 
as they are to relate to an object, they must necessarily agree 

1 [die mir jetzt vor Sinnen schweben^\ 

8 [Begriff.] * [dieses eine Bewusstsein.] 

4 [Reading, with Adickes, mit der . . . mit dent for in der . . . in dent.] 



TRANSCENDENTAL DEDUCTION (A) 135 

with one another, that is, must possess that unity which con- A 105 
stitutes the concept of an object. 

But it is clear that, since we have to deal only with the 
manifold of our representations, and since that x (the object) 
which corresponds to them is nothing to us being, as it is, 
something that has to be distinct from all our representations 
the unity which the object makes necessary can be nothing 
else than the formal unity of consciousness in the synthesis of 
the manifold of representations. It is only when we have thus 
produced synthetic unity in the manifold of intuition that we 
are in a position to say that we know the object. But this unity 
is impossible if the intuition cannot be generated in accord- 
ance with a rule by means of such a function of synthesis as 
makes the reproduction of the manifold a priori necessary, 
and renders possible a concept in which it is united. Thus we 
think a triangle as an object, in that we are conscious of the 
combination of three straight lines according to a rule by 
which such an intuition can always be represented. This unity 
of rule determines all the manifold, and limits it to conditions 
which make unity of apperception possible. The concept of 
this unity is the representation of the object = x, which I 
think through the predicates, above mentioned, of a triangle. 

All knowledge demands a concept, though that concept A 106 
may, indeed, be quite imperfect or obscure. But a concept 
is always, as regards its form, something universal which 
serves as a rule. The concept of body, for instance, as the 
unity of the manifold which is thought through it, serves as 
a rule in our knowledge of outer appearances. But it can be 
a rule for intuitions only in so far as it represents in any given 
appearances the necessary reproduction of their manifold, 
and thereby the synthetic unity in our consciousness of them. 
The concept of body, in the perception of something outside 
us, necessitates the representation of extension, and there- 
with representations of impenetrability, shape, etc. 

All necessity, without exception, is grounded in a tran- 
scendental condition. There must, therefore, be a transcend- 
ental ground of the unity of consciousness in the synthesis 
of the manifold of all our intuitions, and consequently also 
of the concepts of objects in general, and so of all objects 
of experience, a ground without which it would be impossible 



136 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

to think any object for our intuitions; for this object is no 
more than that something, the concept of which expresses 
such a necessity of synthesis. 

This original and transcendental condition is no other 

A 107 than transcendental apperception. Consciousness of self 
according to the determinations of our state in inner percep- 
tion is merely empirical, and always changing. No fixed 
and abiding self can present itself in this flux of inner appear- 
ances. Such consciousness is usually named inner sense, or 
empirical apperception. What has necessarily to be repre- 
sented as numerically identical cannot be thought as such 
through empirical data. To render such a transcendental 
presupposition valid, there must be a condition which 
precedes all experience, and which makes experience itself 
possible. 

There can be in us no modes of knowledge, no connection 
or unity of one mode of knowledge with another, without that 
unity of consciousness which precedes all data of intuitions, 
and by relation to which representation of objects is alone 
possible. This pure original unchangeable consciousness I 
shall name transcendental apperception. That it deservec this 
name is clear from the fact that even the purest objective 
unity, namely, that of the a priori concepts (space and time), 
is 1 only possible through relation of the intuitions to such 
unity of consciousness. The numerical unity of this appercep- 
tion is thus the a priori ground of all concepts, just as the 
manifoldness of space and time is the a priori ground of 
the intuitions of sensibility. 

A 108 This transcendental unity of apperception forms out of 2 
all . possible appearances, which can stand alongside one 
another in one experience, a connection of all these repre- 
sentations according to laws. For this unity of consciousness 
would be impossible if the mind in knowledge of the manifold 
could not become conscious of the identity of function whereby 
it 8 synthetically combines it in one knowledge. The original 
and necessary consciousness of the identity of the self is thus 
at the same time a consciousness of an equally necessary unity 
of the synthesis of all appearances according to concepts, that 

1 [Reading, with Erdmann, sei for sein.] a \macht aus.] 

3 [Reading, with Wille, es for sie.] 



TRANSCENDENTAL DEDUCTION (A) 137 

is, according to rules, which not only make them necessarily 
reproducible but also in so doing determine an object for their 
intuition, that is, the concept of something wherein they are 
necessarily interconnected. For the mind could never think 
its identity in the manifoldness of its representations, and 
indeed think this identity a priori, if it did not have before 
its eyes the identity of its act, whereby it subordinates all 
synthesis of apprehension (which is empirical) to a transcend- 
ental unity, thereby rendering possible their interconnection 
according to a priori rules. 

Now, also, we are in a position to determine more ade- 
quately our concept 1 of an object in general. All representations 
have, as representations, their object, and can themselves in 
turn become objects of other representations. Appearances are 
the sole objects which can be given to us immediately, and A 109 
that in them which relates immediately to the object is called 
intuition. But these appearances are not things in themselves; 
they are only representations, which in turn have their object 
an object which cannot itself be intuited by us, and which 
may, therefore, be named the non-empirical, that is, transcend- 
ental object x. 

The pure concept of this transcendental object, which in 
reality throughout all our knowledge is always one and the 
same, is what can alone confer upon all 2 our empirical con- 
cepts in general relation to an object, that is, objective reality. 
This concept cannot contain any determinate intuition, and 
therefore refers only to that unity which must be met with 
in any manifold of knowledge which stands in relation to an 
object. This relation is nothing but the necessary unity of 
consciousness, and therefore also of the synthesis of the mani- 
fold, through a common function of the mind, which com- 
bines it in one representation. Since this unity must be re- 
garded as necessary a priori otherwise knowledge would 
be without an object the relation to a transcendental object, 
that is, the objective reality of our empirical knowledge, rests A no 
on the transcendental law, that all appearances, in so far as 
through them objects are to be given to us, must stand under 
those a priori rules of synthetical unity whereby the inter- 

1 [Reading, with Adickes, unseren Begriff for unsere Begriffe.] 
8 [Reading, with Erdmann, was alien for was in alien.} 



138 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

relating of these appearances in empirical intuition is alone 
possible. In other words, appearances in experience must 
stand under the conditions of the necessary unity of apper- 
ception, just as in mere intuition they must be subject to the 
formal conditions of space and of time. Only thus can any 
knowledge become possible at all. 

4. Preliminary Explanation of the Possibility of the 
Categories^ as Knowledge a priori 

There is one single experience in which all perceptions 
are represented as in thoroughgoing and orderly connection, 
just as there is only one space and on time in which all 
modes 1 of appearance and all relation of being or not being 
occur. When we speak of different experiences, we can refer 
only to the various perceptions, all of which, as such, belong 
to one and the same general experience. This thoroughgoing 
synthetic unity of perceptions is indeed the form of experience; 
it is nothing else than the synthetic unity of appearances in 
accordance with concepts. 

Unity of synthesis according to empirical concepts would 
be altogether accidental, if these latter were not based *on a 
transcendental ground of unity. Otherwise it would be possible 
for appearances to crowd in upon the soul, and yet to be such 
as would never allow of experience. Since connection in accord- 
ance with universal and necessary laws would be lacking, all 
relation of knowledge to objects would fall away. The appear- 
ances might, indeed, constitute intuition without thought, 2 
but not knowledge; and consequently would be for us as good 
as nothing. 

The a priori conditions of a possible experience in general 
are at the same time conditions of the possibility of objects 
of experience. Now I maintain that the categories, above 8 
cited, are nothing but the conditions of thought in a possible 
experience, just as space and time are 4 the conditions of in- 
tuition for that same experience. They are fundamental con- 
cepts by which we think objects in general for appearances, 
and have therefore a priori objective validity. This is exactly 
what we desired to prove. 

1 [Formen.] * [gedankenlose Anschauung.} 

8 [Reading, with Erdmann, oben for eben.] * [enthalten.] 



TRANSCENDENTAL DEDUCTION (A) 139 

But the possibility, indeed the necessity, of these cate- 
gories rests on the relation in which our entire sensibility, 
and with it all possible appearances, stand to original apper- 
ception. In original apperception everything must necessarily 
conform to the conditions of the thoroughgoing unity of self- 
consciousness, that is, to the universal functions of synthesis, A 112 
namely, to that synthesis according to concepts in which 
alone apperception can demonstrate a priori its complete and 
necessary identity. Thus the concept of a cause is nothing but 
a synthesis (of that which follows in the time-series, with other 
appearances) according to concepts', and without such unity, 
which has its a priori rule, and which subjects the appear- 
ances to itself, no thoroughgoing, universal, and therefore 
necessary, unity of consciousness would be met with in the 
manifold of perceptions. These perceptions would not then 
belong to any experience, consequently would be without an 
object, merely a blind play of representations, less even than 
a dream. 

All attempts to derive these pure concepts of understand- 
ing from experience, and so to ascribe to them a merely em- 
pirical origin, are entirely vain and useless. I need not insist 
upon the fact that, for instance, the concept of a cause involves 
the character of necessity, which no experience can yield. 
Experience does indeed show that one appearance customarily 
follows upon another, but not that this sequence is necessary, 
nor that we can argue a priori and with complete universality 
from the antecedent, viewed as a condition, to the consequent. 
But as regards the empirical rule of association, which we 
must postulate throughout when we assert that everything in 
the series of events is so subject to rule that nothing ever A 113 
happens save in so far as something precedes it on which it 
universally follows upon what, I ask, does this rule, as a law 
of nature, rest? How is this association itself possible? The 
ground of the possibility of the association of the manifold, so 
far as it lies in the object, is named the affinity of the manifold. 
I therefore ask, how are we to make comprehensible to our- 
selves the thoroughgoing affinity of appearances, whereby 
they stand and must stand under unchanging laws? 

On my principles it is easily explicable. All possible ap- 
pearances, as representations, belong to the totality of a pos- 



140 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

sible self-consciousness. 1 But as self-consciousness is a tran- 
scendental representation, numerical identity is inseparable 
from it, and is a priori certain. For nothing .can come to our 
knowledge save in terms of this original apperception. Now, 
since this identity must necessarily enter into the synthesis of 
all the manifold of appearances, so far as the synthesis is to 
yield empirical knowledge, the appearances are subject to 
a priori conditions, with which the synthesis of their apprehen- 
sion must be in complete accordance. The representation of 
a universal condition according to which a certain manifold 
can be posited in uniform fashion is called a rule, and, when 
it must be so posited, a law. Thus all appearances stand in 
A 1 14 thoroughgoing connection according to necessary laws, and 
therefore in a transcendental affinity, of which the empirical 
is a mere consequence. 

That nature should direct itself according to our sub- 
jective ground of apperception, and should indeed depend 
upon it in respect of its conformity to law, sounds very strange 
and absurd. But when we consider that this nature is not a 
thing in itself but is merely an aggregate of appearances, so 
many representations of the mind, we shall not be surprised 
that we can discover it only in the radical faculty of all our 
knowledge, namely, in transcendental apperception, in that 
unity on account of which alone it can be entitled object of all 
possible experience, that is, nature. Nor shall we be surprised 
that just for this very reason this unity can be known a priori, 
and therefore as necessary. Were the unity given in itself in- 
dependently of the first sources of our thought, this would 
never be possible. We should not then know of any source 
from which we could obtain the synthetic propositions assert- 
ing such a universal unity of nature. For they would then have 
to be derived from the objects of nature themselves; and as this 
could take place only empirically, none but a merely accidental 
unity could be obtained, which would fall far short of the 
necessary interconnection that we have in mind when we speak 
of nature. 

1 \zu dem ganzen moglichen Selbstbewusstsein.} 



TRANSCENDENTAL DEDUCTION (A) 141 



DEDUCTION OF THE PURE CONCEPTS OF A 115 
UNDERSTANDING 

Section 3 

THE RELATION OF THE UNDERSTANDING TO OBJECTS IN 
GENERAL, AND THE POSSIBILITY OF KNOWING THEM 

A PRIORI 

What we have expounded separately and singly in the 
preceding section, we shall now present in systematic inter- 
connection. There are three subjective sources of knowledge 
upon which rests the possibility of experience in general and 
of knowledge of its objects sense, imagination, and appercep- 
tion. Each of these can be viewed as empirical, namely, in its 
application to given appearances. But all of them are likewise 
a priori elements or foundations, which make this empirical 
employment itself possible. Sense represents appearances em- 
pirically in perception, imagination in association (and repro- 
duction), apperception in the empirical consciousness of the 
identity of the reproduced representations with the appear- 
ances whereby they were given, that is, in recognition. 

But all perceptions are grounded a priori in pure intuition 
(in time, the form of their inner intuition as representations), 
association in pure synthesis of imagination, and empirical Aii6 
consciousness in pure apperception, that is, in the thorough- 
going identity of the self in all possible representations. 

If, now, we desire to follow up the inner ground of this 
connection of the representations to the point upon which 
they have all to converge in order that they may therein for 
the first time acquire the unity of knowledge necessary for 
a possible experience, we must begin with pure appercep- 
tion. Intuitions are nothing to us, and do not in the least 
concern us if they cannot be taken up into consciousness, in 
which they may participate either directly or indirectly. In 
this way alone is any knowledge possible. We are conscious 
a priori of the complete identity of the self in respect of all 
representations which can ever belong to our knowledge, as 
being a necessary condition of the possibility of all representa- 



142 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

tions. For in me they can represent something only in so far 
as they belong with all others 1 to one consciousness, and 
therefore must be at least capable of beirig so connected. 
This principle holds a priori, and may be called the tran- 
scendental principle of the unity of all that is manifold in our 
representations, and consequently also in intuition. Since this 
unity of the manifold in one subject is synthetic, pure apper- 

A 117 ception supplies a principle of the synthetic unity of the mani- 
fold in all possible intuition." 

A 118 This synthetic unity presupposes or includes a synthesis, 
and if the former is to be a priori necessary, the synthesis must 
also be a priori. The transcendental unity of apperception thus 
relates to the pure synthesis of imagination, as an a priori 
condition of the possibility of all combination of the manifold 
in one knowledge. But only the productive synthesis of the 

a This proposition is of great importance and calls for careful 
consideration. All representations have a necessary relation to a 
possible empirical consciousness. For if they did not have this, and 
if it were altogether impossible to become conscious of them, this 
would practically amount to the admission of their non-existence. 
But all empirical consciousness has a necessary relation to a tran- 
scendental consciousness which precedes all special experience, 
namely, the consciousness of myself as original apperception. It is 
therefore absolutely necessary that in my knowledge all conscious- 
ness should belong to a single consciousness, that of myself. Here, 
then, is a synthetic unity of the manifold (of consciousness), which 
is known a priori, and so yields the ground for synthetic a priori 
propositions which concern pure thought, just as do space and time 
for the propositions which refer to the form of pure intuition. The 
synthetic proposition, that all the variety of empirical consciousness 
must be combined in one single 2 self-consciousness, is the abso- 
lutely first and synthetic principle of our thought in general. But 
it must not be forgotten that the bare representation T in relation 
to all other representations (the collective unity of which it makes 
possible) is transcendental consciousness. Whether this representa- 
tion is clear (empirical consciousness) 3 or obscure, or even whether 
it ever actually occurs, does not here concern us. But the possibility 
of the logical form of all knowledge is necessarily conditioned by 
relation to this apperception as a faculty. 

1 [Reading, with Erdmann, alien andern for allem anderen^ 
8 [Reading, with Vorlander, in einem einzigen for in einem einigen.] 
8 [Vorlander would omit, as being meaningless, the parenthesis: (empirischcs 
Bewusstsein).] 



TRANSCENDENTAL DEDUCTION (A) 143 

imagination can take place a priori\ the reproductive rests 
upon empirical conditions. Thus the principle of the necessary 
unity of pure (pfoductive) synthesis of imagination, prior to 
apperception, is the ground of the possibility of all know- 
ledge, especially of experience. 

We entitle the synthesis of the manifold in imagination 
transcendental, if without distinction of intuitions it is directed 
exclusively to the a priori combination of the manifold; and 
the unity of this synthesis is called transcendental, if it is repre- 
sented as a priori necessary in relation to the original unity 
of apperception. Since this unity of apperception underlies 
the possibility of all knowledge, the transcendental unity of 
the synthesis of imagination is the pure form of all possible 
knowledge; and by means of it all objects of possible experi- 
ence must be represented a priori. 

The unity of apperception in relation to the synthesis of A 119 
imagination is the understanding] and this same unity, with 
reference to the transcendental synthesis of the imagination, 
the pure understanding. In the understanding there are then 
pure a priori modes of knowledge 1 which contain the neces- 
sary tinity of the pure synthesis of imagination in respect of all 
possible appearances. These are the categories ', that is, the pure 
concepts of understanding. The empirical faculty of know- 
ledge in man must therefore contain an understanding which 
relates to all objects of the senses, although only by means of 
intuition and of its synthesis through imagination. All appear- 
ances, as data 2 for a possible experience, are subject to this 
understanding. This relation of appearances to possible ex- 
perience is indeed necessary, for otherwise they would yield 
no knowledge and would not in any way concern us. We have, 
therefore, to recognise that pure understanding, by means of 
the categories, is a formal and synthetic principle of all ex- 
periences, and that appearances have a necessary relation to 
the understanding. 

We shall now, starting from below, namely, with the em- 
pirical, strive to make clear the necessary connection in which 
understanding, by means of the categories, stands to appear- 
ances. What is first given to us is appearance. When combined A 120 
with consciousness, it is called perception. (Save through its 

1 [Erkenntnisse.] * [Data.] 



144 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

relation to a consciousness that is at least possible, appear- 
ance could never be for us an object of knowledge, and so 
would be nothing to us; and since it has in itself no objective 
reality, but exists only in being known, it would be nothing 
at all.) Now, since every appearance contains a manifold, 
and since different perceptions therefore occur in the mind 
separately and singly, a combination of them, such as they 
cannot have in sense itself, is demanded. There must therefore 
exist in us an active faculty for the synthesis of this manifold. 
To this faculty I give the title, imagination. Its action, when 
immediately directed upon perceptions, I entitle apprehen- 
sion. a Since imagination has to bring the manifold of intuition 
into the form of an image, it must previously have taken the 
impressions up into its activity, that is, have apprehended them. 
A 121 But it is clear that even this apprehension of the manifold 
would not by itself produce an image and a connection of the 
impressions, were it not that there exists a subjective ground 
which leads the mind to reinstate a preceding perception 
alongside the subsequent perception to which it has passed, 
and so to form whole series of perceptions. This is the repro- 
ductive faculty of imagination, which is merely empirical. 

If, however, representations reproduced one another in any 
order, just as they happened to come together, this would not 
lead to any determinate connection of them, but only to acci- 
dental collocations; l and so would not give rise to any know- 
ledge. Their reproduction must, therefore, conform to a 
rule, in accordance with which a representation connects in 
the imagination with some one representation in preference 
to another. This subjective and empirical ground of repro- 
duction according to rules is what is called the association of 
representations. 

Now if this unity of association had not also an objective 

Psychologists have hitherto failed to realise that imagination 
is a necessary ingredient of perception itself. This is due partly to 
the fact that that faculty has been limited to reproduction, partly to 
the belief that the senses not only supply impressions but also com- 
bine them so as to generate images of objects. For that purpose some- 
thing more than the mere receptivity of impressions is undoubtedly 
required, namely, a function for the synthesis of them. 

1 [Haufen.] 



TRANSCENDENTAL DEDUCTION (A) 145 

ground which makes it impossible that appearances should 
be apprehended by the imagination otherwise than under the 
condition of a possible synthetic unity of this apprehension, it 
would be entirely accidental that appearances should fit into a 
connected whole of human knowledge. For even though we 
should have the power of associating perceptions, it would 
remain entirely undetermined and accidental whether they A 122 
would themselves be associable; and should they not be associ- 
able, there might exist a multitude of perceptions, and indeed 
an entire sensibility, in which much empirical consciousness 
would arise in my mind, but in a state of separation, and without 
belonging to a consciousness of myself. This, however, is im- 
possible. For it is only because I ascribe all perceptions to one 
consciousness (original apperception) that I can say of all per- 
ceptions that I am conscious of them. There must, therefore, 
be an objective ground (that is, one that can be comprehended 
a priori^ antecedently to all empirical laws of the imagination) 
upon which rests the possibility, nay, the necessity, of a law 
that extends to all appearances a ground, namely, which 
constrains us to regard all appearances as data of the senses 
that must be associable in themselves and subject to universal 
rules of a thoroughgoing connection in their reproduction. 
This objective ground of all association of appearances I 
entitle their affinity. It is nowhere to be found save in the 
principle of the unity of apperception, in respect of all know- 
ledge which is to belong to me. According to this principle all 
appearances, without exception, must so enter the mind or be 
apprehended, that they conform to the unity of appercep- 
tion. Without synthetic unity in their connection, this would 
be impossible; and such synthetic unity is itself, therefore, 
objectively necessary. 

The objective unity of all empirical consciousness in one A 123 
consciousness, that of original apperception, is thus the neces- 
sary condition of all possible perception; and [this being recog- 
nised we can prove that] the affinity of all appearances, near or 
remote, is a necessary consequence of a synthesis in imagina- 
tion which is grounded a priori on rules. 

Since the imagination is itself a faculty of a priori syn- 
thesis, we assign to it the title, productive imagination. In so 
far as it aims at nothing but necessary unity in the synthesis of 

L 



146 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

what is manifold in appearance, it may be entitled the tran- 
scendental function of imagination. That the affinity of appear- 
ances, and with it their association, and through this, in turn, 
their reproduction according to laws, and so [as involving 
these various factors] experience itself, should only be possible 
by means of this transcendental function of imagination, is 
indeed strange, but is none the less an obvious consequence of 
the preceding argument. For without this transcendental func- 
tion no concepts of objects would together make up a unitary 
experience. 

The abiding and unchanging T 1 (pure apperception) 
forms the correlate of all our representations in so far as it is 
to be at all possible that we should become conscious of them. 
All consciousness as truly belongs to an all-comprehensive 

A 124 pure apperception, as all sensible intuition, as representation, 
does to a pure inner intuition, namely, to time. It is this 
apperception which must be added to pure imagination, in 
order to render its function intellectual. For since the syn- 
thesis of imagination connects the manifold only as it appears 
in intuition, as, for instance, in the shape of a triangle, it is, 
though exercised a priori, always in itself sensible. And while 
concepts, which belong to the understanding, are brought into 
play 2 through relation of the manifold to the unity of apper- 
ception, it is only by means of the imagination that they can be 
brought into relation to sensible intuition. 

A pure imagination, which conditions all a priori know- 
ledge, is thus one of the fundamental faculties of the human 
soul. By its means we bring the manifold of intuition on the 
one side, into connection with the condition of the necessary 
unity of pure apperception on the other. The two extremes, 
namely sensibility and understanding, must stand in neces- 
sary connection with each other through the mediation of this 
transcendental" function of imagination, because otherwise the 
former, though indeed yielding appearances, would supply no 
objects of empirical knowledge, and consequently no experi- 
ence. Actual experience, which is constituted by apprehension, 
association (reproduction), and finally recognition of appear- 

A 125 ances, contains in recognition, the last and highest of these 

1 [das stehende und bleibende Ich.} 
8 [Reading, with Vaihinger, werden Begriffe ins Spiel gebracht.] 



TRANSCENDENTAL DEDUCTION (A) 147 

merely empirical elements of experience, certain concepts 
which render possible the formal unity of experience, and 
therewith all objective validity (truth) of empirical knowledge. 
These grounds of the recognition of the manifold, so far as 
they concern solely the form of an experience in general r , are 
the categories. Upon them is based not only all formal unity in 
the [transcendental] synthesis of imagination, but also, thanks 
to that synthesis, all its empirical employment 1 (in recogni- 
tion, reproduction, association, apprehension) in connection 
with 2 the appearances. For only by means of these funda- 
mental concepts 3 can appearances belong to knowledge or 
even to our consciousness, and so to ourselves. 

Thus the order and regularity in the appearances, which 
we entitle nature^ we ourselves introduce. We could never 
find them in appearances, had not we ourselves, or the nature 
of our mind, originally set them there. For this unity of nature 
has to be a necessary one, that is, has to be an a priori certain 
unity of the connection of appearances; and such synthetic 
unity could not be established a priori if there were not sub- 
jective grounds of such unity contained a priori in the original 
cognitive powers of our mind, and if these subjective condi- 
tions, inasmuch as they are the grounds of the possibility of 
knowing any object whatsoever in experience, were not at A 126 
the same time objectively valid. 

We have already defined the understanding in various 
different ways: as a spontaneity of knowledge (in distinction 
from the receptivity of sensibility), as a power of thought, as 
a faculty of concepts, or again of judgments. All these defini- 
tions, when they are adequately understood, are identical. 
We may now characterise it as the faculty of rules. This dis- 
tinguishing mark is more fruitful, and approximates more 
closely to its essential nature. Sensibility gives us forms (of 
intuition), but understanding gives us rules. The latter is 
always occupied in investigating appearances, in order to 
detect some rule in them. Rules, so far as they are objective, 
and therefore necessarily depend upon the knowledge of the 
object, are called laws. Although we learn many laws through 

1 [Reading, with Adickes, alter empirische Gebrauch for alles empirischen 
Gebrauchs.] 

* [bis herunter *.] * [Elements.} 



148 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

experience, they are only special determinations of still higher 
laws, and the highest of these, under which the others all 1 
stand, issue a priori from the understanding itself. They are 
not borrowed from experience; on the contrary, they have to 
confer upon appearances their conformity to law, and so to 
make experience possible. Thus the understanding is some- 
thing more than a power of formulating rules through com- 
parison of appearances; it is itself the lawgiver of nature. 
Save through it, nature, that is, synthetic unity of the mani- 

A 127 fold of appearances according to rules, would not exist at 
all (for appearances, as such, cannot exist outside us they 
exist only in our sensibility); and this 2 nature, as object of 
knowledge in an experience, with everything which it may 
contain, is only possible in the unity of apperception. The 
unity of apperception is thus 3 the transcendental ground of 
the necessary conformity to law of all appearances in one ex- 
perience. This same unity of apperception in respect to a 
manifold of representations (determining it out of a unity) 4 
acts as the rule, and the faculty of these rules is the under- 
standing. All appearances, as possible experiences, thus lie 
a priori in the understanding, and receive from it -their 
formal possibility, just as, in so far as they are mere in- 
tuitions, they lie in the sensibility, and are, as regards their 
form, only possible through it. 

However exaggerated and absurd it may sound, to say that 
the understanding is itself the source of the laws of nature, 
and so of its formal unity, such an assertion is none the less 
correct, and is in keeping with the object to which it refers, 
namely, experience. Certainly, empirical laws, as such, can 
never derive their origin from pure understanding. That is 
as little possible as to understand completely the inexhaust- 
ible multiplicity of appearances merely by reference to the 
pure form of sensible intuition. But all empirical laws are 

A 128 only special determinations of the pure laws of understanding, 
under which, and according to the norm of which, they first 
become possible. Through them appearances take on an 
orderly character, just as these same appearances, despite 

1 [Reading, with Erdmann, die andern alle for anderc a/Je.] 

a [Reading, with Vaihinger,y&lt;rtf for Diese.} 

9 [Reading, with Erdmann, also for aber.] * [aus einer cinzigen.} 



TRANSCENDENTAL DEDUCTION (A) 149 

the differences of their empirical form, 1 must none the less 
always be in harmony with the pure form of sensibility. 

Pure understanding is thus in the categories the law of 
the synthetic unity of all appearances, and thereby first and 
originally makes experience, as regards its form, possible. 
This is all that we were called upon to establish in the tran- 
scendental deduction of the categories, namely, to render 
comprehensible this relation of understanding to sensibility, 
and, by means of sensibility, to all objects of experience. The 
objective validity of the pure a priori concepts is thereby made 
intelligible, and their origin and truth determined. 

Summary Representation of the Correctness of this Deduction 
of the pure Concepts of Understanding, and of its being 
the only Deduction possible 

If the objects with which our knowledge has to deal were 
things in themselves, we could have no a priori concepts of 
them. For from what source could we obtain the concepts? If we 
derived them from the object (leaving aside the question how 
the object could become known to us), our concepts would A 129 
be merely empirical, not a priori. And if we derived them from 
the self, that which is merely in us could not determine the 
character of an object distinct from our representations, that 
is, could not be a ground why a thing should exist character- 
ised by that which we have in our thought, and why such a 
representation should not, rather, be altogether empty. But 
if, on the other hand, we have to deal only with appearances, 
it is not merely possible, but necessary, that certain a priori 
concepts should precede empirical knowledge of objects. 
For since a mere modification of our sensibility can never be 
met with outside us, the objects, as appearances, constitute an 
object which is merely in us. Now to assert in this manner, 
that all these appearances, and consequently all objects with 
which we can occupy ourselves, are one and all in me, that 
is, are determinations of my identical self, is only another 
way of saying that there must be a complete unity of them 
in one and the same apperception. But this unity of possible 
consciousness also constitutes the form of all knowledge of 
objects; through it the manifold is thought as belonging to a 

1 \unerachtetdcr Verse hie denheit ihrer empirischen Form.} 



i$o KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

single object. Thus the mode in which the manifold of sensible 
representation (intuition) belongs to one consciousness pre- 
cedes all knowledge of the object as the intellectual form of 
such knowledge, and itself constitutes a formal a priori know- 
A 130 ledge of all objects, so far as they are thought (categories). 
The synthesis of the manifold 1 through pure imagination, 
the unity of all representations in relation to original apper- 
ception, precede all empirical knowledge. Pure concepts of 
understanding are thus a priori possible, and, in relation to 
experience, are indeed necessary; and this for the reason 
that our knowledge has to deal solely with appearances, the 
possibility of which lies in ourselves, and the connection and 
unity of which (in the representation of an object) are to be 
met with only in ourselves. Such connection and unity must 
therefore precede all experience, and are required for the 
very possibility of it in its formal aspect. From this point of 
view, the only feasible one, our deduction of the categories 
has been developed. 

1 [Reading desselben for derselben.} 



DEDUCTION OF THE PURE CONCEPTS OF THE 

UNDERSTANDING 1 
[As restated in 2nd edition] 

Section 2 

TRANSCENDENTAL DEDUCTION OF THE PURE CONCEPTS 
OF THE UNDERSTANDING 

i5 
The Possibility of Combination in General 

THE. manifold of representations can be given in an intuition 
which is purely sensible, that is, nothing but receptivity ; and 
the form of this intuition can lie a priori in our faculty of 
representation, without being anything more than the mode in 
which the subject is affected. But the combination (conjunctid) 
of a manifold in general can never come to us through the 
senses, and cannot, therefore, be already contained in the pure 
form of sensible intuition. For it is an act of spontaneity of the B 130 
faculty of representation; and since this faculty, to distinguish 
it from sensibility, must be entitled understanding, all com- 
bination be we conscious of it or not, be it a combination of 
the manifold of intuition, empirical or non-empirical, 2 or of 
various concepts is an act of the understanding. To this act 
the general title 'synthesis' may be assigned, as indicating 
that we cannot represent to ourselves anything as combined in 
the object which we have not ourselves previously combined, 
and that of all representations combination is the only one which 

1 [What follows, up to p. 175, is Kant's restatement of the Transcendental 
Deduction, in B.] 

* [Reading, with Mellin, cmpirischen oder nicht empirischen for sinnlichen 
oder nicht sinnlichen.} 



152 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

cannot be given through objects. Being an act of the self- 
activity of the subject, it cannot be executed save by the sub- 
ject itself. It will easily be observed that this action is originally 
one and is equipollent l for all combination, and that its dis- 
solution, namely, analysis, which appears to be its opposite, 
yet always presupposes it. For where the understanding has 
not previously combined, it cannot dissolve, since only as 
having been combined by the understanding can anything that 
allows of analysis be given to the faculty of representation. 

But the concept of combination includes, besides the con- 
cept of the manifold and of its synthesis, also the concept of 
the unity of the manifold. Combination is representation of the 
B 131 synthetic unity of the manifold." The representation of this 
unity cannot, therefore, arise out of the combination. On the 
contrary, it is what, by adding itself to the representation of 
the manifold, first makes possible the concept of the combina- 
tion. This unity, which precedes a priori all concepts of com- 
bination, is not the category of unity ( 10); for all categories 
are grounded in logical functions of judgment, and in these 
functions combination, and therefore unity of given concepts, 
is already thought. Thus the category already presupposes 
combination. We must therefore look yet higher for this unity 
(as qualitative, 1 2), namely in that which itself contains the 
ground of the unity of diverse concepts in judgment, and there- 
fore of the possibility of the understanding, even as regards 
its logical employment. 

16 
The Original Synthetic Unity of Apperception 

It must be possible for the *I think' to accompany all my 
representations; for otherwise something would be represented 

Whether the representations are in themselves identical, and 
whether, therefore, one can be analytically thought through the 
other, is not a question that here arises. The consciousness of the one, 
when the manifold is under consideration, has always to be dis- 
tinguished from the consciousness of the other; and it is with the 
synthesis of this (possible) consciousness that we are here alone 
concerned. 

1 {gleichgeltend^ 



TRANSCENDENTAL DEDUCTION (B) 153 

in me which could not be thought at all, and that is equivalent B 132 
to saying that the representation would be impossible, or at 
least would be nothing to me. That representation which can 
be given prior to all tjiought is entitled intuition. All the 
manifold of intuition has, therefore, a necessary relation to the 
'I think' in the same subject in which this manifold is found. 
But this representation is an act of spontaneity^ that is, it 
cannot be regarded as belonging to sensibility. I call it pure 
apperception, to distinguish it from empirical apperception, or, 
again, original^ apperception^ because it is that self-conscious- 
ness which, while generating the representation '/ think' (a 
representation which must be capable of accompanying all 
other representations, and which in all consciousness is one and 
the same), cannot itself be accompanied by any further repre- 
sentation. The unity of this apperception I likewise entitle the 
transcendental unity of self-consciousness, in order to indicate 
the possibility of a priori knowledge arising from it. For the 
manifold representations, which are given in an intuition, 
would not be one and all my representations, if they did 
not all belong to one self-consciousness. As my representa- 
tions* (even if I am not conscious of them as such) they 
must conform to the condition under which alone they can 
stand together in one universal self-consciousness, because 
otherwise they would not all without exception belong to B 133 
me. From this original combination many consequences 
follow. 

This thoroughgoing identity of the apperception of a 
manifold which is given in intuition contains a synthesis of 
representations, and is possible only through the conscious- 
ness of this synthesis. For the empirical consciousness, which 
accompanies different representations, is in itself diverse and 
without relation to the identity of the subject. That relation 
comes about, not simply through my accompanying each re- 
presentation with consciousness, but only in so far as I conjoin 
one representation with another, and am conscious of the syn- 
thesis of them. Only in so far, therefore, as I can unite a 
manifold of given representations in one consciousness y is it 
possible for me to represent to myself the identity of the con- 
sciousness in [i.e. throughout] these representations. In other 

1 [ursprtingliche.} 



154 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

words, the analytic unity of apperception is possible only under 
the presupposition of a certain synthetic unity." 

B i34 The thought that the representations given in intuition one 
and all belong to me, is therefore precisely the same as the 
thought that I unite them in one self-consciousness, or can at 
least so unite them; and although this thought is not itself the 
consciousness of the synthesis of the representations, it pre- 
supposes the possibility of that synthesis. In other words, only 
in so far as I can grasp the manifold of the representations in 
one consciousness, do I call them one and all mine. For other- 
wise I should have as many-coloured and diverse a self as I 
have representations of which I am conscious to myself. Syn- 
thetic unity of the manifold of intuitions, as generated 1 a 
priori, is thus the ground of the identity of apperception itself, 
which precedes a priori all my determinate thought. Com- 
bination does not, however, lie in the objects, and cannot be 
borrowed from them, and so, through perception, first taken up 
into the understanding. On the contrary, it is an affair of the 

B 135 understanding alone, which itself is nothing but the faculty 
of combining a priori, and of bringing the manifold of given 
representations under the unity of apperception. The principle 
of apperception is the highest principle in the whole sphere of 
human knowledge. 

This principle of the necessary unity of apperception is 

The analytic unity of consciousness belongs to all general con- 
cepts, as such. If, for instance, I think red in general, I thereby repre- 
sent to myself a property which (as a characteristic) can be found in 
something, or can be combined with other representations; that is, 
only by means of a presupposed possible synthetic unity can I repre- 
sent to myself the analytic unity. A representation which is to be 
thought as common to different representations is regarded as be- 
B 134 longing to such as have, in addition to it, also something different. 
Consequently it must previously be thought in synthetic unity with 
other (though, it may be, only possible) representations, before I can 
think in it the analytic unity of consciousness, which makes it a con- 
ceptus commums. The synthetic unity of apperception is therefore 
that highest point, to which we must ascribe all employment of the 
understanding, even the whole of logic, and conformably therewith, 
transcendental philosophy. Indeed this faculty of apperception is the 
understanding itself. 

1 [Reading, with Vaihinger, hervorgebracht for gegeben.] 



TRANSCENDENTAL DEDUCTION (B) 155 

itself, indeed, an identical, and therefore analytic, proposi- 
tion; nevertheless it reveals the necessity of a synthesis of the 
manifold given fa intuition, without which the thoroughgoing 
identity of self-consciousness cannot be thought. For through 
the T, as simple representation, nothing manifold is given; 
only in intuition, which is distinct from the T, can a manifold 
be given; and only through combination in one conscious- 
ness can it be thought. An understanding in which through 
self-consciousness all the manifold would eo ipso be given, 
would be intuitive\ our understanding can only think, and 
for intuition must look to the senses. I am conscious of the 
self as identical in respect of the manifold of representations 
that are given to me in an intuition, because I call them one 
and all my representations, and so apprehend them as con- 
stituting one intuition. This amounts to saying, that I am 
conscious to myself a priori of a necessary synthesis of re- 
presentations to be entitled the original synthetic unity of 
apperception under which all representations that are given 
to me must stand, but under which they have also first to 
be brought by means of a synthesis. B 136 

17 

The Principle of the Synthetic Unity is the Supreme 
Principle of all Employment of the Understanding 

The supreme principle of the possibility of all intuition in 
its relation to sensibility is, according to the Transcendental 
Aesthetic, that all the manifold of intuition should be subject 
to the formal conditions of space and time. The supreme prin- 
ciple of the same possibility, in its relation to understanding, 
is that all the manifold of intuition should be subject to con- 
ditions of the original synthetic unity of apperception.* In so 

* Space and time, and all their parts, are intuitions, and are, 
therefore, with the manifold which they contain, single representa- 
tions (vide the Transcendental Aesthetic). Consequently they are not 
mere concepts through which one and the same consciousness is 
found to be contained in a number of representations. On the con- 
trary, through them many representations are found to be contained 
in one representation, and in the consciousness of that representa- 
tion ; and they are thus composite. The unity of that consciousness 



156 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

far as the manifold representations of intuition are given to us, 
they are subject to the former of these two principles; in so far 
as they must allow of being combined in one consciousness, 

B 137 they are subject to the latter. For without such combination 
nothing can be thought or known, since the given repre- 
sentations would not have in common the act of the apper- 
ception 'I think', and so could not be apprehended together in 
one self-consciousness. 

Understanding is, to use general terms, the faculty of 
knowledge. This knowledge consists in the determinate re- 
lation of given representations to an object; and an object is 
that in the concept of which the manifold of a given intuition 
is united. Now all unification of representations demands 
unity of consciousness in the synthesis of them. Consequently 
it is the unity of consciousness that alone constitutes the 
relation of representations to an object, and therefore their 
objective validity and the fact that they are modes of know- 
ledge; and upon it therefore rests the very possibility of the 
understanding. 

The first pure knowledge of understanding, then, upon 
which all the rest of its employment is based, and which'also 
at the same time is completely independent of all conditions 
of sensible intuition, is the principle of the original synthetic 
unity of apperception. Thus the mere form of outer sensible 
intuition, space, is not yet [by itself] knowledge; it supplies 
only the manifold of a priori intuition for a possible know- 
ledge. To know anything in space (for instance, a line), I 

B 138 must draw it, and thus synthetically bring into being a de- 
terminate combination of the given manifold, so that the unity 
of this act is at the same time the unity of consciousness (as 
in the concept of a line); and it is through this unity of con- 
sciousness that an object (a determinate space) is first known. 
The synthetic unity of consciousness is, therefore, an objective 
condition of all knowledge. It is not merely a condition that 
I myself require in knowing an object, but is a condition 
under which every intuition must stand in order to become 
an object for me. For otherwise, in the absence of this 

is therefore synthetic and yet is also original. The singleness of such 
intuitions is found to have important consequences (vide 25). 



TRANSCENDENTAL DEDUCTION (B) 157 

synthesis, the manifold would not be united in one con- 
sciousness. 

Although this proposition makes synthetic unity a con- 
dition of all thought, it is, as already stated, itself analytic. 
For it says no more than that all my representations in any 
given intuition must be subject to that condition under which 
alone I can ascribe them to the identical self as my representa- 
tions, and so can comprehend them as synthetically com- 
bined in one apperception through the general expression, 1 
'I think*. 

This principle is not, however, to be taken as applying 
to every possible understanding, but only to that understand- 
ing through whose pure apperception, in the representation 
'I am', nothing manifold is given. An understanding which 
through its self-consciousness could supply to itself the mani- 
fold of intuition an understanding, that is to say, through B 139 
whose representation the objects of the representation should 
at the same time exist would not require, for the unity of 
consciousness, a special act of synthesis of the manifold. For 
the human understanding, however, which thinks only, and 
does. not intuit, that act is necessary. It is indeed the first 
principle of the human understanding, and is so indispensable 
to it that we cannot form the least conception of any other 
possible understanding, either of such as is itself intuitive or 
of any that may possess an underlying mode of sensible in- 
tuition which is different in kind from that in space and time. 

18 

The Objective Unity of Self -Consciousness 

The transcendental unity of apperception is that unity 
through which all the manifold given in an intuition is united 
in a concept of the object. It is therefore entitled objective, 
and must be distinguished from the subjective unity of con- 
sciousness, which is a determination of inner sense through 
which the manifold of intuition for such [objective] combina- 
tion is empirically given. Whether I can become empirically 
conscious of the manifold as simultaneous or as successive 
depends on circumstances or empirical conditions. Therefore 



158 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

B 140 the empirical unity of consciousness, through association of 
representations, itself concerns an appearance, and is wholly 
contingent. But the pure form of intuition in time, merely 
as intuition in general, which contains a given manifold, is 
subject to the original unity of consciousness, simply through 
the necessary relation of the manifold of the intuition to 
the one '/ think' ', and so through the pure synthesis of 
understanding which is the a priori underlying ground of 
the empirical synthesis. Only the original unity is objectively 
valid; the empirical unity of apperception, upon which we 
are not here dwelling, and which besides is merely derived 
from the former under given conditions in concrete^ has only 
subjective validity. To one man, for instance, a certain word 
suggests one thing, to another some other thing; the unity 
of consciousness in that which is empirical is not, as regards 
what is given, necessarily and universally valid. 

19 

The Logical Form of all Judgments consists in the Objective 
Unity of the Apperception of the Concepts which they 
contain 

I have never been able to accept the interpretation which 
logicians give of judgment in general. It is, they declare, 
the representation of a relation between two concepts. I do 
B 141 not here dispute with them as to what is defective in this 
interpretation that in any case it applies only to categorical, 
not to hypothetical and disjunctive judgments (the two latter 
containing a relation not of concepts but of judgments), an 
oversight from which many troublesome consequences have 
followed." I need only point out that the definition does not 
determine in what the asserted relation consists. 

The lengthy doctrine of the four syllogistic figures concerns 
categorical syllogisms only; and although it is indeed nothing more 
than an artificial method of securing, through the surreptitious 
introduction of immediate inferences (consequentiae immediatae) 
among the premisses of a pure syllogism, the appearance that there 
are more kinds of inference than that of the first figure, this would 
hardly have met with such remarkable acceptance, had not its 
authors succeeded in bringing categorical judgments into such ex- 



TRANSCENDENTAL DEDUCTION (B) 159 

But if I investigate more precisely the relation of the given 
modes of knowledge 1 in any judgment, and distinguish it, 
as belonging to the understanding, from the relation accord- 
ing to laws of the reproductive imagination, which has 
only subjective validity, I find that a judgment is nothing 
but the manner in which given modes of knowledge are 
brought to the objective unity of apperception. This is what 
is intended by the copula 2 'is'. It is employed to distinguish B 142 
the objective unity of given representations from the sub- 
jective. It indicates their relation to original apperception, 
and their necessary unity. It holds good even if the judgment 
is itself empirical, and therefore contingent, as, for example, 
in the judgment, 'Bodies are heavy'. I do not here assert that 
these representations necessarily belong to one another in the 
empirical intuition, but that they belong to one another in 
virtue of the necessary unity of apperception in the synthesis 
of intuitions, that is, according to principles of the object- 
ive determination of all representations, in so far as know- 
ledge can be acquired by means of these representations 
principles which are all derived from the fundamental prin- 
ciple*of the transcendental unity of apperception. Only in this 
way does there arise from this relation a judgment, that is, a 
relation which is objectively valid, and so can be adequately 
distinguished from a relation of the same representations 
that would have only subjective validity as when they are 
connected according to laws of association. In the latter case, 
all that I could say would be, 'If I support a body, I feel an 
impression of weight'; I could not say, 'It, the body, is heavy'. 
Thus to say 'The body is heavy* is not merely to state that 
the two representations have always been conjoined in my 
perception, however often that perception be repeated; what 
we are asserting is that they are combined in the object, no 
matter what the state of the subject may be. 

elusive respect, as being those to which all others must allow of 
being reduced teaching which, as indicated in 9, is none the less 
erroneous. 

1 [Erkenntnisse*} * [Verhdltniswdrtchen.} 



160 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

B 143 20 

All Sensible Intuitions are subject to the Categories ', as Con- 
ditions under which alone their- Manifold can come to- 
gether in one Consciousness 

The manifold given in a sensible intuition is necessarily 
subject to the original synthetic unity of apperception, be- 
cause in no other way is the unity of intuition possible ( 17). 
But that act of understanding by which the manifold of given 
representations (be they intuitions or concepts) is brought 
under one apperception, is the logical function of judgment 
(cf. 19). All the manifold, therefore, so far as it is given in a 
single empirical intuition, is determined in respect of one of 
the logical functions of judgment, and is thereby brought into 
one consciousness. Now the categories are just these functions 
of judgment, in so far as they are employed in determination 
of the manifold of a given intuition (cf. 13). Consequently, 
the manifold in a given intuition is necessarily subject to the 
categories. 
Bi 44 21 

Observation 

A manifold, contained in an intuition which I call mine, is 
represented, by means of the synthesis of the understanding, as 
belonging to the necessary unity of self-consciousness; and this 
is effected by means of the category. This [requirement of a] 
category therefore shows that the empirical consciousness of a 
given manifold in a single intuition is subject to a pure self- 
consciousness a priori, just as is empirical intuition to a pure 
sensible intuition, which likewise takes place a priori. Thus in 
the above proposition a beginning is made of a deduction of 
the pure concepts of understanding; and in this deduction, 
since the categories have their source in the understanding 
alone, independently of sensibility ', I must abstract from the 

a The proof of this rests on the represented unity of intuition , by 
which an object is given. This unity of intuition always includes in 
itself a synthesis of the manifold given for an intuition, and so 
already contains the relation of this manifold to the unity of apper- 
ception. 



TRANSCENDENTAL DEDUCTION (B) 161 

mode in which the manifold for an empirical intuition is given, 
and must direct attention solely to the unity which, in terms of 
the category, and by means of the understanding, enters into 
the intuition. In what follows (cf. 26) it will be shown, from 
the mode in which the empirical intuition is given in sensibil- 
ity, that its unity is no other than that which the category B 145 
(according to 20) prescribes to the manifold of any given in- 
tuition. Only thus, by demonstration of the a priori validity 
of the categories in respect of all objects of our senses, will the 
purpose of the deduction be fully attained. 

But in the above proof there is one feature from which I 
could not abstract, the feature, namely, that the manifold to be 
intuited must be given prior to the synthesis of understanding, 
and independently of it. How this takes place, remains here 
undetermined. For were I to think an understanding which is 
itself intuitive (as, for example, a divine understanding which 
should not represent to itself given objects, but through whose 
representation the objects should themselves be given or pro- 
duced), the categories would have no meaning whatsoever in 
respect of such a mode of knowledge. They are merely rules for 
an understanding whose whole power consists in thought, con- 
sists, that is, in the act whereby it brings the synthesis of a mani- 
fold, given to it from elsewhere in intuition, to the unity of ap- 
perception a faculty, therefore, which by itself knows nothing 
whatsoever, but merely combines and arranges the material of 
knowledge, that is, the intuition, which must be given to it by 
the object. This peculiarity of our understanding, that it can 
produce a priori unity of apperception solely by means of the 
categories, and only by such and so many, is as little capable B 146 
of further explanation as why we have just these and no other 
functions of judgment, or why space and time are the only 
forms of our possible intuition. 



22 

The Category has no other Application in Knowledge 
than to Objects of Experience 

To think an object and to know an object are thus by no 
means the same thing. Knowledge involves two factors: first, 

M 



i62 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

the concept, through which an object in general is thought (the 
category); and secondly, the intuition, through which it is 
given. For if no intuition could be given corresponding to the 
concept, the concept would still indeed be a thought, so far as 
its form is concerned, but would be without any object, and no 
knowledge of anything would be possible by means of it. So 
far as I could know, there would be nothing, and could be 
nothing, to which my thought could be applied. Now, as the 
Aesthetic has shown, the only intuition possible to us is sens- 
ible; consequently, the thought of an object in general, by 
means of a pure concept of understanding, can become know- 
ledge for us only in so far as the concept is related to objects 

B 147 of the senses. Sensible intuition is either pure intuition (space 
and time) or empirical intuition of that which is immediately 
represented, through sensation, as actual in space and time. 
Through the determination of pure intuition we can acquire 
a priori knowledge of objects, as in mathematics, but only 
in regard to their form, as appearances; whether there can be 
things which must be intuited in this form, is still left unde- 
cided. Mathematical concepts are not, therefore, by themselves 
knowledge, except on the supposition that there are things 
which allow of being presented to us only in accordance with 
the form of that pure sensible intuition. Now things in space 
and time are given only in so far as they are perceptions 
(that is, representations accompanied by sensation) therefore 
only through empirical representation. Consequently, the pure 
concepts of understanding, even when they are applied to a 
priori intuitions, as in mathematics, yield knowledge only in 
so far as these intuitions and therefore indirectly by their 
means the pure concepts also can be applied to empirical in- 
tuitions. Even, therefore, with the aid of [pure] intuition, the 
categories do not afford us any knowledge of things; they do 
so only through their possible application to empirical intui- 
tion. In other words, they serve only for the possibility of em- 
pirical knowledge-, and such knowledge is what we entitle 
experience. Our conclusion is therefore this: the categories, 
as yielding knowledge of things, have no kind of application, 

B 148 save only in regard to things which may be objects of possible 
experience. 



TRANSCENDENTAL DEDUCTION (B) 163 

23 

The above proposition is of the greatest importance; for it 
determines the limits of the employment of the pure concepts 
of understanding in regard to objects, just as the Transcen- 
dental Aesthetic determined the limits of the employment of 
the pure form of our sensible intuition. Space and time, as con- 
ditions under which alone objects can possibly be given to us, 
are valid no further than for objects of the senses, and there- 
fore only for experience. Beyond these limits they represent 
nothing; for they are only in the senses, and beyond them have 
no reality. The pure concepts of understanding are free from 
this limitation, and extend to objects of intuition in general, 
be the intuition like or unlike ours, if only it be sensible and 
not intellectual. But this extension of concepts beyond our 
sensible intuition is of no advantage to us. For as concepts of 
objects they are then empty, and do not even enable us to 
judge of their objects whether or not they are possible. They 
are mere forms of thought, without objective reality, since 
we have no intuition at hand to which the synthetic unity 
of apperception, which constitutes the whole content of these 
forms, could be applied, and in being so applied determine 
an object. Only our sensible and empirical intuition can give B 149 
to them body and meaning. 1 

If we suppose an object of a non-sensible intuition to be 
given, we can indeed represent it through all the predicates 
which are implied in the presupposition that it has none of the 
characteristics proper to sensible intuition; that it is not ex- 
tended or in space, that its duration is not a time, that no 
change (succession of determinations in time) is to be met with 
in it, etc. But there is no proper knowledge if I thus merely in- 
dicate what the intuition of an object is not&gt; without being able 
to say what it is that is contained in the intuition. For I have 
not then shown that the object which I am thinking through 
my pure concept is even so much as possible, not being in a 
position to give any intuition corresponding to the concept, 
and being able only to say that our intuition is not applicable to 
it. But what has chiefly to be noted is this, that to such a some- 
thing [in general] not a single one of all the categories could 

1 [Sinn und Bedeutung.] 



164 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

be applied. We could not, for instance, apply to it the concept 
of substance, meaning something which can exist as subject 
and never as mere predicate. For save in so far as empirical 
intuition provides the instance to which to apply it, I do not 
know whether there can be anything that corresponds to such 
a form of thought. But of this more hereafter. 

B 150 24 

The Application of the Categories to Objects of the Senses 
in General 

The pure concepts of understanding relate, through the 
mere understanding, to objects of intuition in general, whether 
that intuition be our own or any other, provided only it be 
sensible. The concepts are, however, for this very reason, mere 
forms of thought, through which alone no determinate object is 
known. The synthesis or combination of the manifold in them 
relates only to the unity of apperception, and is thereby the 
ground of the possibility of a priori knowledge, so far as such 
knowledge rests on the understanding. This synthesis, there- 
fore, is at once transcendental and also purely intellectual. But 
since there lies in us a certain form of a priori sensible intui- 
tion, which depends on the receptivity of the faculty of repre- 
sentation (sensibility), the understanding, as spontaneity, is able 
to determine inner sense through the manifold of given repre- 
sentations, in accordance with the synthetic unity of apper- 
ception, and so to think synthetic unity of the apperception 
of the manifold of a priori sensible intuition that being the 
condition under which all objects of our human intuition must 
necessarily stand. In this way the categories, in themselves 
mere forms of thought, obtain objective reality, that is, ap- 
B 151 plication to objects which can be given us in intuition. These 
objects, however, are only appearances, for it is solely of 
appearances that we can have a priori intuition. 

This synthesis of the manifold of sensible intuition, which 
is possible and necessary a priori^ may be entitled figurative 
synthesis (synthesis speciosa), to distinguish it from the syn- 
thesis which is thought in the mere category in respect of the 
manifold of an intuition in general, and which is entitled 
combination through the understanding (synthesis intellectua- 



TRANSCENDENTAL DEDUCTION (B) 165 

Us). Both are transcendental, not merely as taking place x 
a priori, but also as conditioning the possibility of other 
a priori knowledge. 

But the figurative synthesis, if it be viewed merely in its 
relation to the original synthetic unity of apperception, that 
is, to the transcendental unity which is thought in the cate- 
gories, must, in order to be distinguished from the merely 
intellectual combination, be called the transcendental synthesis 
of imagination. Imagination is the faculty of representing in 
intuition an object that is not itself present. Now since all our 
intuition is sensible, the imagination, owing to the subjective 
condition under which alone it can give to the concepts of 
understanding a corresponding intuition, belongs to sen- 
sibility. But inasmuch as its synthesis is an expression of 
spontaneity, which is determinative and not, like sense, deter- 
minable merely, and which is therefore able to determine B 152 
sense a priori in respect of its form in accordance with the 
unity of apperception, imagination is to that extent a faculty 
which determines the sensibility a priori] and its synthesis of 
intuitions, conforming as it does to the categories, must be 
the transcendental synthesis of imagination. This synthesis is 
an action 2 of the understanding on the sensibility; and is 
its first application and thereby the ground of all its other 
applications to the objects of our possible intuition. As 
figurative, it is distinguished from the intellectual synthesis, 
which is carried out by the understanding alone, without the 
aid of the imagination. In so far as imagination is spontaneity, 
I sometimes also entitle it the productive imagination, to dis- 
tinguish it from the reproductive imagination, whose synthesis 
is entirely subject to empirical laws, the laws, namely, of 
association, and which therefore contributes nothing to the 
explanation of the possibility of a priori knowledge. The repro- 
ductive synthesis falls within the domain, not of transcendental 
philosophy, but of psychology. 



This is a suitable place for explaining the paradox which 
must have been obvious to everyone in our exposition of the 

1 [Reading, with Erdmann, stattfinden for vorgehen.} 
1 [Wirkung.] 



166 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

form of inner sense ( 6): namely, that this sense represents 
B 153 to consciousness even our own selves only as we appear to 
ourselves, not as we are in ourselves. For we intuit ourselves 
only as we are inwardly affected, and this would seem to be 
contradictory, since we should then have to be in a passive 
relation [of active affection] to ourselves. It is to avoid this 
contradiction that in systems of psychology inner sense, 
which we have carefully distinguished from the faculty 
of apperception, is commonly regarded as being identical 
with it. 

What determines inner sense is the understanding and its 
original power of combining the manifold of intuition, that is, 
of bringing it under an apperception, upon which the possi- 
bility of understanding itself rests. Now the understanding 
in us men is not itself a faculty of intuitions, and cannot, 
even if intuitions be given 1 in sensibility, take them up into 
itself in such manner as to combine them as the manifold of 
its own intuition. Its synthesis, therefore, if the synthesis be 
viewed by itself alone, is nothing but the unity of the act, 
of which, as an act, it is conscious to itself, even without 
[the aid of] sensibility, but through which it is yet able to 
determine the sensibility. The understanding, that is to say, 
in respect of the manifold which may be given to it in accord- 
ance with the form of sensible intuition, is able to deter- 
mine sensibility inwardly. Thus the understanding, under 
the title of a transcendental synthesis of imagination, performs 
this act upon the passive subject, whose faculty it is, and we 
B 154 are therefore justified in saying that inner sense is affected 
thereby. Apperception and its synthetic unity is, indeed, very 
far from being identical with inner sense. The former, as the 
source of all combination, applies to the manifold of intui- 
tions in general, and in the guise of 2 the categories, prior 
to all sensible intuition, to objects in general. Inner sense, 
on the other hand, contains the mere form of intuition, but 
without combination of the manifold in it, and therefore so 
far contains no determinate intuition, which is possible only 
through the consciousness of the determination of the manifold 
by the transcendental act of imagination (synthetic influence 

1 [Reading, with Vaihinger, w&amp;ren for w&amp;re.] 
a [unter dem Namen. And reading, with Gorland, und unter for unter.] 



TRANSCENDENTAL DEDUCTION (B) 167 

of the understanding upon inner sense), which I have entitled 
figurative synthesis. 

This we can always perceive in ourselves. We cannot think 
a line without drawing it in thought, or a circle without 
describing it. We cannot represent the three dimensions of 
space save by setting three lines at right angles to one another 
from the same point. Even time itself we cannot represent, 
save in so far as we attend, in the drawing of a straight line 
(which has to serve as the outer figurative representation of 
time), merely to the act of the synthesis of the manifold where- 
by we successively determine inner sense, and in so doing 
attend to the succession of this determination in inner sense. 
Motion, as an act of the subject (not as a determination of 
an object)," and therefore the synthesis of the manifold in B 155 
space, first produces the concept of succession if we abstract 
from this manifold and attend solely to the act through which 
we determine the inner sense according to its form. The 
understanding does not, therefore, find in inner sense such 
a combination of the manifold, but produces it, in that it 
affects that sense. 

How the T that thinks 1 can be distinct from the T that 
intuits itself (for I can represent still other modes of intuition 
as at least possible), and yet, as being the same subject, can be 
identical with the latter; and how, therefore, I can say: "I, as 
intelligence and thinking* subject, know myself as an object 
that is thought? in so far as I am likewise given to myself in 
intuition, but know myself, like other phenomena, only as I 
appear to myself, not as I am to the understanding" these 
are questions that raise no greater nor less difficulty than 
how I can be an object to myself at all, and, more particularly, 
an object of intuition and of inner perceptions. Indeed, that B 156 

Motion of an object in space does not belong to a pure science, 
and consequently not to geometry. For the fact that something is 
movable cannot be known a priori, but only through experience. 
Motion, however, considered as the describing of a space, is a pure 
act of the successive synthesis of the manifold in outer intuition in 
general by means of the productive imagination, and belongs not 
only to geometry, but even to transcendental philosophy. 

1 [Reading, with Vaihinger, das Ich, das denkt for das Ich, der ich denke.] 
a [denkend.] 3 [gedachtes.] 



i68 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

this is how it must be, is easily shown if we admit that 
space is merely a pure form of the appearances of outer sense 
by the fact that we cannot obtain for ourselves a represen- 
tation of time, which is not an object of outer intuition, except 
under the image of a line, which we draw, and that by this 
mode of depicting it alone could we know the singleness 1 
of its dimensions; and similarly by the fact that for all inner 
perceptions we must derive the determination of lengths of 
time or of points of time from the changes which are exhibited 
to us in outer things, and that the determinations of inner 
sense have therefore to be arranged as appearances in time 
in precisely the same manner in which we arrange those of 
outer sense in space. If, then, as regards the latter, we admit 
that we know objects only in so far as we are externally 
affected, we must also recognise, as regards inner sense, that 
by means of it we intuit ourselves only as we are inwardly 
affected by ourselves; in other words, that, so far as inner 
intuition is concerned, we know our own subject only as 
appearance, not as it is in itself. a 

B i57 25 

On the other hand, in the transcendental synthesis of the 
manifold of representations in general, and therefore in the 
synthetic original unity of apperception, I am conscious of 
myself, not as I appear to myself, nor as I am in myself, but 
only that I am. This representation is a thought, not an intui- 
tion. Now in order to know ourselves, there is required in 
addition to the act of thought, which brings the manifold 
of every possible intuition to the unity of apperception, a de- 
terminate mode of intuition, whereby this manifold is given; 
it therefore follows that although my existence is not indeed 

I do not see why so much difficulty should be found in admit- 
ting that our inner sense is affected by ourselves. Such affection finds 
B 157 exemplification in each and every act of attention. In every act of 
attention the understanding determines inner sense, in accordance 
with the combination which it thinks, to that inner intuition which 
corresponds to the manifold in the synthesis of the understanding. 
How much the mind is usually thereby affected, everyone will be 
able to perceive in himself. 

1 [Einheit.] 



TRANSCENDENTAL DEDUCTION (B) 169 

appearance (still less mere illusion), the determination of my 
existence a can take place only in conformity with the form of B 158 
inner sense, according to the special mode in which the mani- 
fold, which I combine, is given in inner intuition. Accordingly 
I have no knowledge of myself as I am but merely as I appear 
to myself. The consciousness of self is thus very far from being 
a knowledge of the self, notwithstanding all the categories 
which [are being employed to] constitute the thought of an 
object in general, through combination of the manifold in one 
apperception. Just as for knowledge of an object distinct from 
me I require, besides the thought of an object in general 
(in the category), an intuition by which I determine that 
general concept, so for knowledge of myself I require, besides 
the consciousness, that is, besides the thought of myself, an 
intuition of the manifold in me, by which I determine this 
thought. I exist as an intelligence which is conscious solely 
of its power of combination; but in respect of the manifold B 159 
which it has to combine I am subjected to a limiting condition 
(entitled inner sense), namely, that this combination can be 
made intuitable only according to relations of time, which 
lie entirely outside the concepts of understanding, strictly re- 
garded. Such an intelligence, therefore, can know itself only 
as it appears to itself in respect of an intuition which is not 
intellectual and cannot be given by the understanding itself, 
not as it would know itself if its intuition were intellectual. 

a The 'I think' expresses the act of determining my existence. 
Existence is already given thereby, but the mode in which I am to 
determine this existence, that is, the manifold belonging to it, is not 
thereby given. In order that it be given, self-intuition is required; 
and such intuition is conditioned by a given a priori form, namely, 
time, which is sensible and belongs to the receptivity of the deter- 
minable [in me]. Now since I do not have another self- intuition B 158 
which gives the determining in me (I am conscious only of the 
spontaneity of it) prior to the act of determination^- as time does 
in the case of the determinable, I cannot determine my existence 
as that of a self-active being; all that I can do is to represent to 
myself the spontaneity of my thought, that is, of the determination; 
and my existence is still only determinable sensibly, that is, as the 
existence of an appearance. But it is owing to this spontaneity that 
I entitle myself an intelligence. 

1 \vor dem Aktus des Bestimmens.} 



170 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

26 

Transcendental Deduction of the Universally Possible Em- 
ployment in Experience of the Pure Concepts of the 
Understanding 

In the metaphysical deduction the a priori origin of the 
categories has been proved through their complete agreement 
with the general logical functions of thought; in the transcen- 
dental deduction we have shown their possibility as a priori 
modes of knowledge of objects of an intuition in general 
(cf. 20, 21). We have now to explain the possibility of 
knowing a priori, by means of categories, whatever objects 
may present themselves to our senses, not indeed in respect 
of the form of their intuition, but in respect of the laws of 
their combination, and so, as it were, of prescribing laws to 
B 160 nature, and even of making nature possible. For unless the cate- 
gories discharged this function, there could be no explaining 
why everything that can be presented to our senses must be 
subject to laws which have their origin a priori in the under- 
standing alone. 

First of all, I may draw attention to the fact that by syn- 
thesis of apprehension I understand that combination of the 
manifold in an empirical intuition, whereby perception, that 
is, empirical consciousness of the intuition (as appearance), 
is possible. 

In the representations of space and time we have a priori 
forms of outer and inner sensible intuition; and to these the 
synthesis of apprehension of the manifold of appearance must 
always conform, because in no other way can the synthesis 
take place at all. But space and time are represented a priori 
not merely as forms of sensible intuition, but as themselves 
intuitions which contain a manifold [of their own], and there- 
fore are represented with the determination of the unity 
of this manifold (vide the Transcendental Aesthetic).* Thus 

Space, represented as object (as we are required to do in geo- 
metry), contains more than mere form of intuition; it also contains 
combination of the manifold, given according to the form of sensi- 
bility, in an intuitive representation, so that the form of intuition 
gives only a manifold, the formal intuition gives unity of representa- 
tion. In the Aesthetic I have treated this unity as belonging merely 



TRANSCENDENTAL DEDUCTION (B) 171 

unity of the synthesis of the manifold, without or within us, B 161 
and consequently also a combination to which everything that 
is to be represented as determined in space or in time must 
conform, is given a priori as the condition of the synthesis 
of all apprehension not indeed in, but with these intuitions. 
This synthetic unity can be no other than the unity of the 
combination of the manifold of a given intuition in general 
in an original 1 consciousness, in accordance with the cate- 
gories, in so far as the combination is applied to our sensible 
intuition. All synthesis, therefore, even that which renders 
perception possible, is subject to the categories; and since 
experience is knowledge by means of connected perceptions, 
the categories are conditions of the possibility of experience, 
and are therefore valid a priori for all objects of experience. 



When, for instance, by apprehension 2 of the manifold of a B 162 
house I make the empirical intuition of it into a perception, 
the necessary unity of space and of outer sensible intuition in 
general lies at the basis of my apprehension, and I draw as it 
were.the outline of the house in conformity with this synthetic 
unity of the manifold in space. But if I abstract from the form 
of space, this same synthetic unity has its seat in the under- 
standing, and is the category of the synthesis of the homogene- 
ous in an intuition in general, that is, the category of quantity. 
To this category, therefore, the synthesis of apprehension, that 
is to say, the perception, must completely conform. 6 

to sensibility, simply in order to emphasise that it precedes any con- B 161 
cept, although, as a matter of fact, it presupposes a synthesis which 
does not belong to the senses but through which all concepts of 
space and time first become possible. For since by its means (in that 
the understanding determines the sensibility) space and time are 
first given as intuitions, the unity of this a priori intuition belongs to 
space and time, and not to the concept of the understanding (cf. 

2 )- 

6 In this manner it is proved that the synthesis of apprehension, 

which is empirical, must necessarily be in conformity with the syn- 
thesis of apperception, which is intellectual and is contained in the 
category completely a priori. It is one and the same spontaneity, 



* [Changed, in 4th edition, to apperception^ 



172 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

When, to take another example, I perceive the freezing of 
water, I apprehend two states, fluidity and solidity, and these 
as standing to one another in a relation of time. But in time, 

B 163 which I place at the basis of the appearance [in so far] as 
[it is] inner intuition, I necessarily represent to myself synthetic 
unity of the manifold, without which that relation of time could 
not be given in an intuition as being determined in respect of 
time-sequence. Now this synthetic unity, as a condition 
a priori under which I combine the manifold of an intui- 
tion in general, is if I abstract from the constant form of 
my inner intuition, namely, time the category of cause, by 
means of which, when I apply it to my sensibility, I deter- 
mine everything that happens in accordance with the relation 
which it prescribes, and I do so in time in general. Thus my 
apprehension of such an event, and therefore the event itself, 
considered as a possible perception, is subject to the con- 
cept of the relation of effects and causes, and so in all other 
cases. 

Categories are concepts which prescribe laws a priori to 
appearances, and therefore to nature, the sum of all appear- 
ances (natura materialiter spectatd). The question therefore 
arises, how it can be conceivable that nature should have to 
proceed in accordance with categories which yet are not de- 
rived from it, and do not model themselves upon its pattern; 
that is, how they can determine a priori the combination of 
the manifold of nature, while yet they are not derived from it. 
The solution of this seeming enigma is as follows. 

B l6 4 That the law s of appearances in nature must agree with the 
understanding and its a priori form, that is, with its faculty 
of combining the manifold in general, is no more surprising 
than that the appearances themselves must agree with the form 
of a priori sensible intuition. For just as appearances do not 
exist in themselves but only relatively to the subject in which, 
so far as it has senses, they inhere, so the laws do not exist in 
the appearances but only relatively to this same being, so far as 
it has understanding. Things in themselves would necessarily, 



which in the one case, under the title of imagination, and in the other 
case, under the title of understanding, brings combination into the 
manifold of intuition. 



TRANSCENDENTAL DEDUCTION (B) 173 

apart from any understanding that knows them, conform to 
laws of their own. But appearances are only representations of 
things which are unknown as regards what they may be in 
themselves. As mere representations, they are subject to no 
law of connection save that which the connecting faculty pre- 
scribes. Now it is imagination that connects the manifold of 
sensible intuition; and imagination is dependent for the unity 
of its intellectual synthesis upon the understanding, and for 
the manifoldness of its apprehension upon sensibility. All 
possible perception is thus dependent upon synthesis of appre- 
hension, and this empirical synthesis in turn upon transcen- 
dental synthesis, and therefore upon the categories. Conse- 
quently, all possible perceptions, and therefore everything that 
can come to empirical consciousness, that is, all appearances 
of nature, must, so far as their connection is concerned, be sub- B 165 
ject to the categories. Nature, considered merely as nature in 
general, is dependent upon these categories as the original 
ground of its necessary conformity to law (natura formaliter 
spectata). Pure understanding is not, however, in a position, 
through mere categories, to prescribe to appearances any 
a priori laws other than those which are involved in a nature 
in general, that is, in the conformity to law of all appearances 
in space and time. Special laws, as concerning those appear- 
ances which are empirically determined, cannot in their specific 
character be derived from the categories, although they are 
one and all subject to them. To obtain any knowledge what- 
soever of these special laws, we must resort to experience; but 
it is the a priori laws that alone can instruct us in regard to 
experience in general, and as to what it is that can be known 
as an object of experience. 

27 

Outcome of this Deduction of the Concepts of 
Understanding 

We cannot think an object save through categories; we 
cannot know an object so thought save through intuitions 
corresponding to these concepts. Now all our intuitions are 
sensible; and this knowledge, in so far as its object is given, is 
empirical. But empirical knowledge is experience. Conse- B 166 



174 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

quently, there can be no a priori knowledge^ except of objects 
of possible experience? 

But although this knowledge is limited to objects of ex- 
perience, it is not therefore all derived from experience. The 
pure intuitions [of receptivity] and the pure concepts of under- 
standing are elements in knowledge, and both are found in us 
a priori. There are only two ways in which we can account for 
a necessary agreement of experience with the concepts of its 
objects: either experience makes these concepts possible or these 
concepts make experience possible. The former supposition 
B 167 does not hold in respect of the categories (nor of pure sensible 
intuition); for since they are a priori concepts, and there- 
fore independent of experience, the ascription to them of an 
empirical origin would be a sort of generatio aequivoca. There 
remains, therefore, only the second supposition a system, as 
it were, of the epigenesis of pure reason namely, that the cate- 
gories contain, on the side of the understanding, the grounds 
of the possibility of all experience in general. How they make 
experience possible, and what are the principles of the possi- 
bility of experience that they supply in their application to 
appearances, will be shown more fully in the following chapter 
on the transcendental employment of the faculty of judgment. 
A middle course may be proposed between the two above 
mentioned, namely, that the categories are neither self-thought* 
first principles a priori of our knowledge nor derived from ex- 
perience, but subjective dispositions of thought, implanted in 
us from the first moment of our existence, and so ordered by 
our Creator that their employment is in complete harmony 
with the laws of nature in accordance with which experience 

a Lest my readers should stumble at the alarming evil con- 
sequences which may over-hastily be inferred from this statement, I 
may remind them that for thought the categories are not limited by 
the conditions of our sensible intuition, but have an unlimited field. 
It is only the knowledge of that which we think, the determining of 
the object, that requires intuition. In the absence of intuition, the 
thought of the object may still have its true and useful consequences, 
as regards the subject's employment of reason. The use of reason is 
not always directed to the determination of the object, that is, to know- 
ledge, but also to the determination of the subject and of its volition 
a use which cannot therefore be here dealt with. 

1 [sdbstgedachte.] 



TRANSCENDENTAL DEDUCTION (B) 175 

proceeds a kind of preformation-system of pure reason. 
Apart, however, from the objection that on such an hypo- 
thesis we can set no limit to the assumption of predetermined 
dispositions to future judgments, there is this decisive objec- 
tion against the suggested middle course, that the necessity B 168 
of the categories, which belongs to their very conception, 
would then have to be sacrificed. The concept of cause, for 
instance, which expresses the necessity of an event under a 
presupposed condition, would be false if it rested only on an 
arbitrary subjective necessity, implanted in us, of connecting 
certain empirical representations according to the rule of 
causal relation. I would not then be able to say that the effect 
is connected with the cause in the object, that is to say, neces- 
sarily, but only that I am so constituted that I cannot think 
this representation otherwise than as thus connected. This is 
exactly what the sceptic most desires. For if this be the situa- 
tion, all our insight, resting on the supposed objective validity 
of our judgments, is nothing but sheer illusion; nor would 
there be wanting people who would refuse to admit this sub- 
jective necessity, a necessity which can only be felt. Certainly 
a man cannot dispute with anyone regarding that which de- 
pends merely on the mode in which he is himself organised. 

Brief Outline of this Deduction 

The deduction is the exposition 1 of the pure concepts of the 
understanding, and therewith of all theoretical a priori know- 
ledge, as principles of the possibility of experience the prin- 
ciples being here taken as the determination of appearances in 
space and time in general, and this determination, in turn, as B 169 
ultimately following from the original synthetic unity of apper- 
ception, as the form of the understanding in its relation to 
space and time, the original forms of sensibility. 



I consider the division by numbered paragraphs as neces- 
sary up to this point, because thus far we have had to treat 
of the elementary concepts. We have now to give an account 
of their employment, and the exposition may therefore pro- 
ceed in continuous fashion, without such numbering. 
1 [Darstellung,] 



TRANSCENDENTAL ANALYTIC 

BOOK II 
THE ANALYTIC OF PRINCIPLES 

GENERAL logic is constructed upon a ground plan which 
exactly coincides with the division of the higher faculties of 
knowledge. These are: under standing, judgment?- and reason. 

A 131 In accordance with the functions and order of these mental 
powers, which in current speech are comprehended under the 
general title of understanding, logic in its analytic deals with 
concepts, judgments, and inferences. 

B 170 Since this merely formal logic abstracts from all content 
of knowledge, whether pure or empirical, and deals solely with 
the form of thought in general (that is, of discursive know- 
ledge), it can comprehend the canon of reason in its analytic 
portion. For the form of reason possesses its established rules, 
which can be discovered a priori, simply by analysing the 
actions of reason into their components, 2 without our requir- 
ing to take account of the special nature of the knowledge 
involved. 

As transcendental logic is limited to a certain determinate 
content, namely, to the content of those modes of knowledge 
which are pure and a priori, it cannot follow general logic in 
this division. For the transcendental employment of reason is 
not, it would seem, objectively valid, and consequently does 
not belong to the logic of truth, i.e. to the Analytic. As a 
logic of illusion, it calls for separate location in the scholastic 
edifice, under the title of Transcendental Dialectic. 

1 [Here, and throughout the subsequent sections, judgment, when thus used 
in the singular, is to be understood as a translation of the term Urteilskraft, and 
so as signifying 'faculty of judgment'.] 

2 [in ikre Momentc.]. 

176 



ANALYTIC OF PRINCIPLES 177 

Understanding and judgment find, therefore, in tran- 
scendental logic their canon of objectively valid and correct 
employment; they belong to its analytic portion. Reason, on 
the other hand, in its endeavours to determine something a 
priori in regard to objects and so to extend knowledge beyond B 171 
the limits of possible experience, is altogether dialectical. Its A 132 
illusory assertions cannot find place in a canon such as the 
analytic is intended to contain. 

The Analytic of Principles will therefore be a canon solely 
for judgment } instructing it how to apply to appearances the 
concepts of understanding, which contain the condition for 
a priori rules. For this reason, while adopting as my theme 
the principles of the under standing^ strictly so called, I shall 
employ the title doctrine of judgment ', as more accurately in- 
dicating the nature of our task. 



INTRODUCTION 

TRANSCENDENTAL JUDGMENT IN GENERAL 

If*understanding in general is to be viewed as the faculty of 
rules, judgment will be the faculty of subsuming under rules; 
that is, of distinguishing whether something does or does not 
stand under a given rule (casus datae legis). General logic con- 
tains, and can contain, no rules for judgment. For since general 
logic abstracts from all content of knowledge, the sole task that 
remains to it is to give an analytical exposition of the form of \B 172 
knowledge [as expressed] in concepts, in judgments, and in 
inferences, and so to obtain formal rules for all employment of 
understanding. If it sought to give general instructions how we 
are to subsume under these rules, that is, to distinguish whether 
something does or does not come under them, that could only 
be by means of another rule. This in turn, for the very reason 
that it is a rule, again demands guidance from judgment. 
And thus it appears that, though understanding is capable of 
being instructed, and of being equipped with rules, judgment 
is a peculiar talent which can be practised only, and cannot 
be taught. It is the specific quality of so-called mother-wit; 
and its lack no school can make good. For although an 
abundance of rules borrowed from the insight of others may 

N 



178 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

indeed be proffered to, and as it were grafted upon, a limited 
understanding, the power of rightly employing them must 
belong to the learner himself; and in the absence of such a 
natural gift no rule that may be prescribed to him for this pur- 

B in} P ose can ensure against misuse. A physician, a judge, or a 
ruler may have at command many excellent pathological, 
legal, or political rules, even to the degree that he may become 
a profound teacher of them, and yet, none the less, may easily 
stumble in their application. For, although admirable in 
understanding, he may be wanting in natural power of judg- 
ment. He may comprehend the universal m abstracto, and yet 
not be able to distinguish whether a case in concrete comes 
under it. Or the error may be due to his not having received, 
through examples and actual practice, adequate training for 
this particular act of judgment. Such sharpening of the judg- 
ment is indeed the one great benefit of examples. Correctness 
and precision of intellectual insight, on the other hand, they 
more usually somewhat impair. For only very seldom do they 
adequately fulfil the requirements of the rule (as casus in ter- 
minis). Besides, they often weaken that effort which is re- 
quired of the understanding to comprehend properly the rules 
in their universality, in independence of the particular circum- 
stances of experience, and so accustom us to use rules rather 
as formulas than as principles. Examples are thus the go-cart 

B 174 of judgment; and those who are lacking in the natural talent 
can never dispense with them. 

A 135 But although general logic can supply no rules for judg- 
ment, the situation is entirely different in transcendental logic. 
The latter would seem to have as its peculiar task the advising 
and securing of judgment, by means of determinate rules, in 
the use of the pure inderstanding. For as a doctrine, that is, 

Deficiency in judgment is just what is ordinarily called stupid- 
ity, and for such a failing there is no remedy. An obtuse or narrow- 
minded person to whom nothing is wanting save a proper degree of 
understanding and the concepts appropriate thereto, may indeed be 
trained through study, even to the extent of becoming learned. But 
B 173 as such people are commonly still lacking in judgment (secunda 
Petrt) y it is not unusual to meet learned men who in the application 
of their scientific knowledge betray that original want, which can 
never be made good. 



ANALYTIC OF PRINCIPLES 179 

as an attempt to enlarge the sphere of the understanding in 
the field of pure a priori knowledge, philosophy is by no means 
necessary, and is indeed ill-suited for any such purpose, since 
in all attempts hitherto made, little or no ground has been won. 
On the other hand, if what is designed be a critique to guard 
against errors of judgment (lapsus judicii) in the employment 
of the few pure concepts of understanding that we possess, 
the task, merely negative as its advantages must then be, is 
one to which philosophy is called upon to devote all its re- 
sources of acuteness and penetration. 

Transcendental philosophy has the peculiarity that besides 
the rule (or rather the universal condition of rules), which is 
given in the pure concept of understanding, it can also specify 
a priori the instance to which the rule 1 is to be applied. The B 175 
advantage which in this respect it possesses over all other 
didactical sciences, with the exception of mathematics, is due 
to the fact that it deals with concepts which have to relate to 
objects a priori, and the objective validity of which cannot 
therefore be demonstrated a posteriori, since that would mean A 136 
the complete ignoring 2 of their peculiar dignity. It must 
formfilate by means of universal but sufficient marks the con- 
ditions under which objects can be given in harmony with 
these concepts. Otherwise the concepts would be void of all 
content, and therefore mere logical forms, not pure concepts 
of the understanding. 

This transcendental doctrine of judgment will consist of 
two chapters. The first will treat of the sensible condition under 
which alone pure concepts of understanding can be employed, 
that is, of the schematism of pure understanding. The second 
will deal with the synthetic judgments which under these con- 
ditions follow a priori from pure concepts of understanding, 
and which lie a priori at the foundation of all other modes of 
knowledge that is, with the principles of pure understanding. 

1 [Reading, with Erdmann, soil for sollen.] 
2 [Reading, with Vaihinger, unberiicksichtigt for unberiihrt.] 



;37j TRANSCENDENTAL DOCTRINE OF JUDGMENT 
(OR ANALYTIC OF PRINCIPLES) 

CHAPTER I 

THE SCHEMATISM OF THE PURE CONCEPTS OF 
UNDERSTANDING 

IN all subsumptions of an object under a concept the repre- 
sentation of the object must be homogeneous with the concept; 
in other words, the concept must contain something which is 
represented in the object that is to be subsumed under it. 
This, in fact, is what is meant by the expression, 'an object is 
contained under a concept*. Thus the empirical concepft of a 
plate is homogeneous with the pure geometrical concept of a 
circle. The roundness which is thought in the latter can be 
intuited in the former. 1 

But pure concepts of understanding being quite hetero- 
geneous from empirical intuitions, and indeed from all 
sensible intuitions, can never be met with in any intuition. 
For no one will say that a category, such as that of causality, 
A Jpj can be intuited through sense and is itself contained in appear- 
ance. How, then, is the subsumption of intuitions under pure 
concepts, the application of a category to appearances, pos- 
sible? A transcendental doctrine of judgment is necessary just 
because of this natural and important question. We must be 
able to show how pure concepts can be applicable to appear- 
ances. In none of the other sciences is this necessary. For since 
in these sciences the concepts through which the object is 
thought in [itsj general [aspects] are not so utterly distinct 
and heterogeneous from those which represent it in concrete, 

1 [Reading, with Vaihinger, in dem letzteren . . . t m ersteren for in dem 
ersteren . . . im letzteren.} 

180 



SCHEMATISM 181 

as given, no special discussion of the applicability of the 1 
former to the latter is required. 

Obviously there must be some third thing, which is homo- 
geneous on the one hand with the category, and on the other 
hand with the appearance, and which thus makes the appli- 
cation of the former to the latter possible. This mediating 
representation must be pure, that is, void of all empirical 
content, and yet at the same time, while it must in one 
respect be intellectual, it must in another be sensible. Such a 
representation is the transcendental schema. 

The concept of understanding contains pure synthetic 
unity of the manifold in general. Time, as the formal con- 
dition of the manifold of inner sense, and therefore of the 
connection of all representations, contains an a priori manifold 
in pure intuition. Now a transcendental determination of 
time is so far homogeneous with the category, which con- 
stitutes its unity, in that it is universal and rests upon an B 178 
a priori rule. But, on the other hand, it is so far homogeneous A 139 
with appearance, in that time is contained in every empirical 
representation of the manifold. Thus an application of the 
category to appearances becomes possible by means of the 
transcendental determination of time, which, as the schema 
of the concepts of understanding, mediates the subsumption 
of the appearances under the category. 

After what has been proved in the deduction of the cate- 
gories, no one, I trust, will remain undecided in regard to 
the question whether these pure concepts of understanding 
are of merely empirical or also of transcendental employ- 
ment; that is, whether as conditions of a possible experience 
they relate a priori solely to appearances, or whether, as 
conditions of the possibility of things in general, they can be 
extended to objects in themselves, without any restriction 
to our sensibility. For we have seen that concepts are alto- 
gether impossible, 2 and can have no meaning, if no object 
is given for them, or at least for the elements of which they 
are composed. They cannot, therefore, be viewed as appli- 
cable to things in themselves, independent of all question 
as to whether and how these may be given to us. We 

1 [Reading, with Vorlander, der for des.] 
* [Altered by Kant (Nachtrage Iviii) to: "are for us without meaning."] 



182 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

have also proved that the only manner in which objects 
can be given to us is by modification of our sensibility; and 

B 179 finally, that pure a priori concepts, in addition to the function 

A 140 of understanding expressed in the category, must contain 
a priori certain formal conditions of sensibility, namely, those 
of inner sense. These conditions of sensibility constitute the 
universal condition under which alone the category can be 
applied to any object. This formal and pure condition of 
sensibility to which the employment of the concept of under- 
standing is restricted, we shall entitle the schema of the 
concept. The procedure of understanding in these schemata 
we shall entitle the schematism of pure understanding. 

The schema is in itself always a product of imagination. 
Since, however, the synthesis of imagination aims at no 
special intuition, but only at unity in the determination of 
sensibility, the schema has to be distinguished from the image. 

If five points be set alongside one another, thus, , I 

have an image of the number five. But if, on the other hand, 
I think only a number in general, whether it be five or a 
hundred, this thought is rather the representation of a method 
whereby a multiplicity, for instance a thousand, may hfe re- 
presented in an image in conformity with a certain concept, 
than the image itself. For with such a number as a thousand 
the image can hardly be surveyed and compared with the 
concept. This representation of a universal procedure of 

B 180 imagination in providing an image for a concept, I entitle the 
schema of this concept. 

Indeed it is schemata, not images of objects, which underlie 

A 141 our pure sensible concepts. No image could ever be adequate 
to the concept of a triangle in general. It would never attain 
that universality of the concept which renders it valid of all 
triangles, whether right-angled, obtuse-angled, or acute- 
angled; it would always be limited to a part only of this 
sphere. The schema of the triangle can exist nowhere but in 
thought. It is a rule of synthesis of the imagination, in respect 
to pure figures in space. Still less is an object of experience or 
its image ever adequate to the empirical concept; for this latter 
always stands in immediate relation to the schema of imagina- 
tion, as a rule for the determination of our intuition, in accord- 
ance with some specific universal concept. The concept 'dog* 



SCHEMATISM 183 

signifies a rule according to which my imagination can 
delineate the figure of a four-footed animal in a general 
manner, without limitation to any single determinate figure 
such as experience, or any possible image that I can repre- 
sent in concrete, actually presents. This schematism of our 
understanding, in its application to appearances and their 
mere form, is an art concealed in the depths of the human 
soul, whose real modes of activity nature is hardly likely ever B 181 
to allow us to discover, and to have open to our gaze. This 
much only we can assert: the image is a product of the 
empirical faculty of reproductive 1 imagination; the schema of 
sensible concepts, such as of figures in space, is a product and, A 142. 
as it were, a monogram, of pure a priori imagination, through 
which, and in accordance with which, images themselves first 
become possible. These images can be connected with the 
concept only by means of the schema to which they belong. 2 
In themselves they are never completely at one with the con- 
cept. On the other hand, the schema of a pure concept of 
understanding can never be reduced to any image whatso- 
ever. It is simply the pure synthesis, determined by a rule of 
that uViity, in accordance with concepts, to which the category 
gives expression. It is a transcendental product of imagina- 
tion, a product which concerns the determination of inner 
sense in general according to conditions of its form (time), in 
respect of all representations, so far as these representations 
are to be connected a priori in one concept in conformity with 
the unity of apperception. 

That we may not be further delayed by a dry and tedious 
analysis of the conditions demanded by transcendental 
schemata of the pure concepts of understanding in general, 
we shall now expound them according to the order of the 
categories and in connection with them. 

The pure image of all magnitudes (quantorum) for 3 outer B 182 
sense is space; that of all objects of the senses in general is 
time. But the pure schema of magnitude (quantitatis), as a 
concept of the understanding, is number, a representation 
which comprises the successive addition of homogeneous 

1 [Reading, with Vaihinger, reproduktiven for produktivcn.] 

8 [welches sie bezeichnen^\ 

8 [Reading, with Grille, fur den for vor dem.} 



184 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

A 143 units. Number is therefore simply the unity of the synthesis 
of the manifold of a homogeneous intuition in general, a unity 
due to my generating time itself in the apprehension of the 
intuition. 

Reality, in the pure concept of understanding, is that 
which corresponds to a sensation in general; it is that, there- 
fore, the concept of which in itself points to being (in time). 
Negation is that the concept of which represents not-being 
(in time). The opposition of these two thus rests upon the 
distinction of one and the same time as filled and as empty. 
Since time is merely the form of intuition, and so of objects 
as appearances, that in the objects which corresponds to 
sensation is not 1 the transcendental matter of all objects as 
things in themselves (thinghood, 2 reality). Now every sensa- 
tion has a degree or magnitude whereby, in respect of its 
representation of an object otherwise remaining the same, 
it can fill out one and the same time, that is, occupy inner 
sense more or less completely, down to its cessation in 
nothingness (~o*=negatto). There therefore exists a relation 
and connection between reality and negation, or rather a 

B 183 transition from the one to the other, which makes every reality 
representable as a quantum. The schema of a reality, as the 
quantity of something in so far as it fills time, is just this con- 
tinuous and uniform production of that reality in time as we 
successively descend from a sensation which has a certain 
degree to its vanishing point, or progressively ascend from 
its negation to some magnitude of it. 

The schema of substance is permanence of the real in time, 
that is, the representation of the real as a substrate of empirical 
determination of time in general, and so as abiding while all 
else changes. (The existence of what is transitory 3 passes away 
in time but not time itself. To time, itself non-transitory 4 and 
abiding, there corresponds in the [field of] appearance what 
is non-transitory in its existence, that is, substance. Only in 
[relation to] substance can the succession and coexistence of 
appearances be determined in time.) 

1 [Reading, with Wille, nicht die for die. This seems, on the whole, preferable 
to taking, with Erdmann, the second part of the sentence as: "that in the objects 
[as things in themselves] which corresponds to sensation is the transcendental 
matter . . ."] 

a [Sachheit.} 3 [des Wandelbaren} 4 [unwandelbar.] 



SCHEMATISM 185 

The schema of cause, 1 and of the causality 2 of a thing in A 144 
general, is the real upon which, whenever posited, something 
else always follows. It consists, therefore, in the succession 
of the manifold, in so far as that succession is subject to a 
rule. 

The schema of community or reciprocity, the reciprocal 
causality of substances in respect of their accidents, is the co- 
existence, according to a universal rule, of the determinations B 184 
of the one substance with those of the other. 

The schema of possibility is the agreement of the synthesis 
of different representations with the conditions of time in 
general. Opposites, for instance, cannot exist in the same thing 
at the same time, but only the one after the other. The schema 
is therefore the determination of the representation of a thing 
at any time whatsoever. 

The schema of actuality is existence in some determinate A 145 
time. 

The schema of necessity is existence of an object at all 
times. 

We thus find that the schema of each category contains and 
makes capable of representation only a determination of time. 3 
The schema of magnitude is the generation (synthesis) of 
time itself in the successive apprehension of an object. The 
schema of quality is the synthesis of sensation or perception 
with the representation of time; it is the rilling of time. The 
schema of relation is the connecting of perceptions with one 
another at all times according to a rule of time-determination. 
Finally the schema of modality and of its categories is time 
itself as the correlate of the determination whether and how 
an object belongs to time. The schemata are thus nothing 
but a priori determinations of time in accordance with rules. 
These rules relate in the order of the categories to the time- 
series^ the time-content l , the time-order , and lastly to the scope 
of time* in respect of all possible objects. B 185 

It is evident, therefore, that what the schematism of under- 
standing effects by means of the transcendental synthesis of 

1 [Ursachc.] 2 [Kausalitat.] 

3 [Reading, with Adickes, einer jeden Kategorie nur etne Zeitbestimmung^ 
ah for einer je den Kategorie, als.} 
[Zeitinbegriff.] 



186 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

imagination is simply the unity of all the manifold of intuition 
in inner sense, and so indirectly the unity of apperception which 
as a function corresponds to the receptivity of inner sense. 

A 146 The schemata of the pure concepts of understanding are thus 
the true and sole conditions under which these concepts ob- 
tain relation to objects and so possess significance. In the end, 
therefore, the categories have no other possible employment 
than the empirical. As the grounds of an a priori necessary 
unity that has its source in the necessary combination of all 
consciousness in one original apperception, they serve only to 
subordinate appearances to universal rules of synthesis, and 
thus to fit them for thoroughgoing connection in one ex- 
perience. 

All our knowledge falls within the bounds of possible ex- 
perience, and just in this universal relation to possible experi- 
ence consists that transcendental truth which precedes all 
empirical truth and makes it possible. 

But it is also evident that although the schemata of sensi- 

B 186 bility first realise the categories, they at the same time restrict 
them, that is, limit them to conditions which lie outside the 
understanding, and are due to sensibility. The schema, while in 
agreement with the category, is properly only the phenomenon 
or sensible concept of an object. (Numerus est quantitas phaeno- 
menon, sensatio realitas phaenomenon, constans et perdurabile 
rerum substantia phaenomenon y aeternitas necessitas phaeno- 
menon^ etc) If we omit a restricting condition, we would seem 

A 147 to extend the scope of the concept that was previously limited. 
Arguing from this assumed fact, we conclude that the cate- 
gories in their pure significance, apart from all conditions of 
sensibility, ought to apply to things in general, as they are, 
and not, like the schemata, represent them only as they appear. 
They ought, we conclude, to possess a meaning independent 
of all schemata, and of much wider application. Now there 
certainly does remain in the pure concepts of understanding, 
even after elimination of every sensible condition, a meaning; 
but it is purely logical, signifying only the bare unity of the 
representations. The pure concepts can find no object, and so 

[ l In the text the words et perdurabile rerum are in italics, and there are 
commas after aeternitas and necessitas. I also read, with Erdmann, phaenomenon 
for phaenomena.\ 



SCHEMATISM 187 

can acquire no meaning which might yield a concept 1 of some 
object. Substance, for instance, when the sensible determina- 
tion of permanence is omitted, would mean simply a something 
which can be thought only as subject, never as a predicate of 
something else. Such a representation I can put to no use, for 
it tells me nothing as to the nature of that which is thus to B 187 
be viewed as a primary subject. The categories, therefore, 
without schemata, are merely functions of the understanding 
for concepts; and represent no object. This [objective] mean- 
ing they acquire from sensibility, which realises the under- 
standing in the very process of restricting it. 

1 [Altered by Kant (Nachtrdge Ixi) to: eine Erkenntnis .] 



A 148 TRANSCENDENTAL DOCTRINE OF JUDGMENT 
(OR ANALYTIC OF PRINCIPLES) 

CHAPTER II 

SYSTEM OF ALL PRINCIPLES OF PURE UNDERSTANDING 

IN the preceding chapter we have considered transcendental 
judgment with reference merely to the universal conditions 
under which it is alone justified in employing pure concepts 
of understanding for synthetic judgments. Our task now is 
to exhibit, in systematic connection, the judgments which 
understanding, under this critical provision, actually achieves 
a priori. There can be no question that in this enquiry our 
table of categories is the natural and the safe guide. For since 
it is through the relation of the categories to possible experi- 
ence that all pure a priori knowledge of understanding has 
to be constituted, their relation to sensibility in general will 

B 188 exhibit completely and systematically all the transcendental 
principles of the use of the understanding. 

Principles a priori are so named not merely because they 
contain in themselves the grounds of other judgments, but also 
because they are not themselves grounded in higher and more 
universal modes of knowledge. But this characteristic does not 

A 149 remove them beyond the sphere of proof. This proof cannot, 
indeed, be carried out in any objective fashion, since such 
principles [do not rest on objective considerations but] lie at 
the foundation of all knowledge of objects. 1 This does not, 
however, prevent our attempting a proof, from the subjective 
sources of the possibility of knowledge of an object in general. 
Such proof is, indeed, indispensable, if the propositions are not 
to incur the suspicion of being merely surreptitious assertions. 

1 [This sentence has been variously emended. In the main, I follow Wille.] 

188 



PRINCIPLES OF PURE UNDERSTANDING 189 

Secondly, we shall limit ourselves merely to those prin- 
ciples which stand in relation to the categories. The principles 
of the Transcendental Aesthetic, according to which space and 
time are the conditions of the possibility of all things as ap- 
pearances, and likewise the restriction of these principles, 
namely, that they cannot be applied to things in themselves, 
are matters which do not come within the range of our present 
enquiry. For similar reasons mathematical principles form 
no part of this system. They are derived solely from intuition, 
not from the pure concept of understanding. Nevertheless, 
since they too are synthetic a priori judgments, their possi- B 189 
bility must receive recognition in this chapter. For though 
their correctness and apodeictic certainty do not indeed re- 
quire to be established, their possibility, as cases of evident 
a priori knowledge, has to be rendered conceivable, and to be 
deduced. 

We shall also have to treat of the principle of analytic 
judgments, in so far as it stands in contrast with that 1 of syn- A 150 
thetic judgments with which alone strictly we have to deal. 
For by thus contrasting them we free the theory of synthetic 
judgments from all misunderstanding, and have them in their 
own peculiar nature clearly before us. 



THE SYSTEM OF THE PRINCIPLES OF PURE 
UNDERSTANDING 

Section i 
THE HIGHEST PRINCIPLE OF ALL ANALYTIC JUDGMENTS 

The universal, though merely negative, condition of all our 
judgments in general, whatever be the content of our know- 
ledge, and however it may relate to the object, is that they be 
not self-contradictory; for if self-contradictory, these judgments 
are in themselves, even without reference to the object, null and 
void. But even if our judgment contains no contradiction, it may B 190 
connect concepts in a manner not borne out by the object, or 
else in a manner for which no ground is given, either a priori 
or a posteriori ', sufficient to justify such judgment, and so may 

1 [Reading, with Mellin, mil dent der for mil der,} 



190 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

still, in spite of being free from all inner contradiction, be 
either false or groundless. 

A 151 The proposition that no predicate contradictory of a thing 
can belong to it, is entitled the principle of contradiction, and 
is a universal, though merely negative, criterion of all truth. 
For this reason it belongs only to logic. It holds of knowledge, 
merely as knowledge in general, irrespective of content; and 
asserts that the contradiction completely cancels and in- 
validates it. 

But it also allows of a positive employment, not merely, 
that is, to dispel falsehood and error (so far as they rest on 
contradiction), but also for the knowing of truth. For, if 
the judgment is analytic^ whether negative or affirmative, its 
truth can always be adequately known in accordance with the 
principle of contradiction. The reverse L of that which as con- 
cept is contained and is thought in the knowledge of the object, 

B 191 is always rightly denied. But since the opposite of the concept 
would contradict the object, the concept itself must neces- 
sarily be affirmed of it. 

The principle of contradiction must therefore be recognised 
as being the universal and completely sufficient principle of 
all analytic knowledge^ but beyond the sphere of analytic 
knowledge it has, as a sufficient criterion of truth, no authority 
and no field of application. The fact that no knowledge can 
be contrary to it without self-nullification, makes this prin- 

A 152 ciple a conditio sine qua non, but not a determining ground, 
of the truth of our [non-analytic] knowledge. Now in our 
critical enquiry it is only with the synthetic portion of our 
knowledge that we are concerned; and in regard to the truth 
of this kind of knowledge we can never look to the above 
principle for any positive information, though, of course, since 
it is inviolable, we must always be careful to conform to it. 

Although this famous principle is thus without content and 
merely formal, it has sometimes been carelessly formulated in 
a manner which involves the quite unnecessary admixture of 
a synthetic element. The formula runs: It is impossible that 
something should at one and the same time both be and not be. 
Apart from the fact that the apodeictic certainty, expressed 
through the word 'impossible', is superfluously added since 

1 [Widerspiel.} 



PRINCIPLES OF PURE UNDERSTANDING 191 

it is evident of itself from the [very nature of the] proposition 
the proposition is modified by the condition of time. It then, 
as it were, asserts: A thing = ^4, which is something = B, can- B 192 
not at the same time be not-B, but may very well in succession 
be both B and not-.#. For instance, a man who is young cannot 
at the same time be old, but may very well at one time be young 
and at another time not-young, that is, old. The principle of 
contradiction, however, as a merely logical principle, must not 
in any way limit its assertions to time-relations. The above 
formula is therefore completely contrary to the intention of the A 153 
principle. The misunderstanding results from our first of all 
separating a predicate of a thing from the concept of that 
thing, and afterwards connecting this predicate with its op- 
posite a procedure which never occasions a contradiction with 
the subject but only with the predicate which has been syn- 
thetically connected with that subject, and even then only 
when both predicates are affirmed at one and the same time. 
If I say that a man who is unlearned is not learned, the con- 
dition, at one and the same time, must be added; for he who 
is at one time unlearned can very well at another be learned. 
But if I say, no unlearned man is learned, the proposition is 
analytic, since the property, unlearnedness, now goes to make 
up the concept of the subject, and the truth of the negative 
judgment then becomes evident as an immediate consequence 
of the principle of contradiction, without requiring the supple- 
mentary condition, at one and the same time. This, then, is 
the reason why I have altered its formulation, namely, in order B 193 
that the nature of an analytic proposition be clearly expressed 
through it. 



THE SYSTEM OF THE PRINCIPLES OF PURE A 154 

UNDERSTANDING 

Section 2 
THE HIGHEST PRINCIPLE OF ALL SYNTHETIC JUDGMENTS 

The explanation of the possibility of synthetic judgments 
is a problem with which general logic has nothing to do. It 
need not even so much as know the problem by name. But in 



192 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

transcendental logic it is the most important of all questions; 
and indeed, if in treating of the possibility of synthetic a priori 
judgments we also take account of the conditions and scope of 
their validity, it is the only question with which it is concerned. 
For upon completion of this enquiry, transcendental logic is 
in a position completely to fulfil its ultimate purpose, that of 
determining the scope and limits of pure understanding. 

In the analytic judgment we keep to the given concept, 
and seek to extract something from it. If it is to be affirmative, 
I ascribe to it only what is already thought in it. If it is to be 
negative, I exclude from it only its opposite. But in synthetic 
judgments I have to advance beyond the given concept, 
B 194 viewing as in relation with the concept something altogether 
different from what was thought in it. This relation is con- 
sequently never a relation either of identity or of contradiction; 
A 155 and from the judgment, taken in and by itself, the truth or 
falsity of the relation can never be discovered. 

Granted, then, that we must advance beyond a given 
concept in order to compare it synthetically with another, a 
third something l is necessary, as that wherein alone the syn- 
thesis of two concepts can be achieved. What, now, rs this 
third something that is to be the medium of all synthetic 
judgments? There is only one 2 whole 8 in which all our re- 
presentations are contained, namely, inner sense and its 
a priori form, time. The synthesis of representations rests on 
imagination; and their synthetic unity, which is required for 
judgment, on the unity of apperception. In these, therefore, 
[in inner sense, imagination, and apperception], we must 
look for the possibility of synthetic judgments; and since all 
three contain the sources of a priori representations, they 
must also account for the possibility of pure synthetic judg- 
ments. For these reasons they are, indeed, indispensably 
necessary for any knowledge of objects, which rests entirely 
on the synthesis of representations. 

If knowledge is to have objective reality, that is, to re- 
late to an object, and is to acquire meaning and significance 
in respect to it, the object must be capable of being in some 

1 [fin Drittes.} 

* [Reading, with Mellin, Es gibt nur einen for Es ist nur ein.} 

* [Inbegriff.] 



PRINCIPLES OF PURE UNDERSTANDING 193 

manner given. Otherwise the concepts are empty; through 
them we have indeed thought, but in this thinking we have B 195 
really known nothing; we have merely played with repre- 
sentations. That an object be given (if this expression be A 156 
taken, not as referring to some merely mediate process, but as 
signifying immediate presentation in intuition), means simply 
that the representation through which the object is thought 
relates to actual or possible experience. Even space and time, 
however free 1 their concepts are from everything empirical, 
and however certain it is that they are represented in the mind 
completely a priori ', would yet be without objective validity, 
senseless and meaningless, if their necessary application to 
the objects of experience were not established. Their repre- 
sentation is a mere schema which always stands in relation 
to the reproductive imagination that calls up and assembles 
the objects of experience. Apart from these objects of ex- 
perience, they would be devoid of meaning. And so it is with 
concepts of every kind. 

The possibility of experience is, then, what gives objective 
reality to all our a priori modes of knowledge. Experience, 
however, rests on the synthetic unity of appearances, that is, 
on a synthesis according to concepts of an 2 object of appear- 
ances in general. Apart from such synthesis it would not be 
knowledge, but a rhapsody of perceptions that would not fit 
into any context according to rules of a completely intercon- 
nected (possible) consciousness, and so would not conform to 
the transcendental and necessary unity of apperception. Ex- B 196 
perience depends, therefore, upon a priori principles of its 
form, that is, upon universal rules of unity in the synthesis of A 157 
appearances. Their objective reality, as necessary conditions 
of experience, and indeed of its very possibility, can always 
be shown in experience. Apart from this relation synthetic 
a priori principles are completely impossible. For they have 
then no third something, that is, no 3 object, in which the 
synthetic unity can exhibit the objective reality of its concepts. 4 

Although we know a priori in synthetic judgments a great 
deal regarding space in general and the figures which produc- 

1 [rein.] a [Reading, with Vaihinger, von einem for vom.] 

8 [Reading, with Grille, kcinen for reinen.} 

4 [Reading, with Vaihinger, Einheit die objektive Realitdt ihrer Begriffe for 
Einheit ihrer Begriffe objektive Realitdt.] 



194 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

tive imagination describes in it, and can obtain such judg- 
ments without actually requiring any experience, yet even this 
knowledge would be nothing but a playing with a mere fig- 
ment of the brain, were it not that space has to be regarded as 
a condition of the appearances which constitute the material 
for outer experience. Those pure synthetic judgments there- 
fore relate, though only mediately, to possible experience, or 
rather to the possibility of experience; and upon that alone is 
founded the objective validity of their synthesis. 

Accordingly, since experience, as empirical synthesis, is, 
in so far as such experience is possible, the one species of 
knowledge which is capable of imparting reality to any non- 
empirical synthesis, 1 this latter [type of synthesis], as know- 
B 197 ledge a priori, can possess truth, that is, agreement with the 
object, only in so far as it contains nothing save what is 
A 158 necessary to synthetic unity of experience in general. 

The highest principle of all synthetic judgments is there- 
fore this: every object stands under the necessary conditions of 
synthetic unity of the manifold of intuition in a possible ex- 
perience. 

Synthetic a priori judgments are thus possible when we re- 
late the formal conditions of a priori intuition, the synthesis of 
imagination and the necessary unity of this synthesis in a tran- 
scendental apperception, to a possible empirical knowledge in 
general. We then assert that the conditions of the possibility 
of experience in general are likewise conditions of the possi- 
bility of the objects of experience, and that for this reason they 
have objective validity in a synthetic a priori judgment. 



THE SYSTEM OF THE PRINCIPLES OF PURE 
UNDERSTANDING 

Section 3 

SYSTEMATIC REPRESENTATION OF ALL THE SYNTHETIC 
PRINCIPLES OF PURE UNDERSTANDING 

That there should be principles at all is entirely due to the 
pure understanding. Not only is it the faculty of rules in re- 

1 [aller anderen Synthesis.} 



PRINCIPLES OF PURE UNDERSTANDING 195 

spect of that which happens, but is itself the source of principles B 198 
according to which 1 everything that can be presented to us as A 159 
an object must conform to rules. For without such rules ap- 
pearances would never yield knowledge of an object corre- 
sponding to them. Even natural laws, viewed as principles of 
the empirical employment of understanding, carry with them 
an expression of necessity, and so contain at least the sugges- 
tion of a determination from grounds which are valid a priori 
and antecedently to all experience. The laws of nature, in- 
deed, one and all, without exception, stand under higher prin- 
ciples of understanding. They simply apply the latter to special 
cases [in the field] of appearance. These principles alone supply 
the concept which contains the condition, and as it were the 
exponents, of a rule in general. What experience gives is the 
instance which stands under the rule. 

There can be no real danger of our regarding merely em- 
pirical principles as principles of pure understanding, or con- 
versely. For the necessity according to concepts which distin- 
guishes the principles of pure understanding, and the lack 
of which is evident in every empirical proposition, however 
general its application, suffices to make this confusion easily 
preventable. But there are pure a priori principles that we 
may not properly ascribe to the pure understanding, which is 
the faculty of concepts. For though they are mediated by the A 160 
understanding, they are not derived from pure concepts but B 199 
from pure intuitions. We find such principles in mathematics. 
The question, however, of their application to experience, that 
is, of their objective validity, nay, even the deduction of the 
possibility of such synthetic a priori knowledge, must always 
carry us back to the pure understanding. 

While, therefore, I leave aside the principles of mathe- 
matics, I shall none the less include those [more fundamental] 
principles upon which the possibility and a priori objective 
validity of mathematics are grounded. These latter must be 
regarded as the foundation 2 of all mathematical principles. 
They proceed from concepts to intuition, not from intuition to 
concepts. 

In the application of pure concepts of understanding to 

1 [Reading, with Erdmann, welchen for welchem.] 
2 [Principium.] 



196 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

possible experience, the employment of their syn thesis Ms either 
mathematical or dynamical', for it is concerned partly with the 
mere intuition of an appearance in general, partly with its 
existence. The a priori conditions of intuition are absolutely 
necessary conditions of any possible experience; those of the 
existence of the objects of a possible empirical intuition are in 
themselves only accidental. The principles of mathematical 
employment will therefore be unconditionally necessary, that 
is, apodeictic. Those of dynamical employment will also in- 

B 200 deed possess the character of a priori necessity, but only under 
the condition of empirical thought in some experience, there- 
fore only mediately and indirectly. Notwithstanding their un- 
doubted certainty throughout experience, they will not con- 

A 161 tain that immediate evidence which is peculiar to the former. 
But of this we shall be better able to judge at the conclusion of 
this system of principles. 

The table of categories is quite naturally our guide in the 
construction of the table of principles. For the latter are simply 
rules for the objective employment of the former. All principles 
of pure understanding are therefore 

I 

Axioms 
of intuition. 

2 3 

Anticipations Analogies 

of perception. of experience. 

4 

Postulates 
of empirical thought in general. 

These titles I have intentionally chosen in order to give 
prominence to differences in the evidence and in the applica- 
tion of the principles. It will soon become clear that the 
B 201 principles involved in the a priori determination of appear- 
ances according to the categories of quantity and of quality 
(only the formal aspect of quantity and quality being con- 
sidered) allow of intuitive certainty, alike as regards their 
evidential force 2 and as regards their a priori application to 

* \der Gebrauch ihrer Synthesis^ * [Evident.} 



AXIOMS OF INTUITION 197 

appearances. They are thereby distinguished from those of A 162 
the other two groups, which are capable only of a merely 
discursive certainty. This distinction holds even while we 
recognise that the certainty is in both cases complete. I shall 
therefore entitle the former principles mathematical \ and 
the latter dynamical. But it should be noted that we are as 
little concerned in the one case with the principles of mathe- B 202 
matics as in the other with the principles of general physical 
dynamics. We treat only of the principles of pure understand- 
ing in their relation to inner sense (all differences among the 
given representations being ignored). It is through these 
principles of pure understanding that the special principles of 
mathematics and of dynamics become possible. I have named 
them, therefore, on account rather of their application than 
of their content. I now proceed to discuss them in the order 
in which they are given in the above table. 

I 

AXIOMS OF INTUITION * 

Their principle is: All intuitions are extensive magnitudes. 
Proofs 

Appearances, in their formal aspect, 2 contain an intuition 
in space and time, which conditions them, one and all, a 

*pnA:] 

The Axioms of Intuition. 

Principle of the pure understanding: All appearances 
are, in their intuition, extensive magnitudes. 

a [Note added in B.] All combination (conjunct) is either com- 
position (compositio) or connection (nexus). The former is the syn- 
thesis of the manifold where its constituents do not necessarily be- 
long to one another. For example, the two triangles into which a 
square is divided by its diagonal do not necessarily belong to one 
another. Such also is the synthesis of the homogeneous in everything 
which can be mathematically treated. This synthesis can itself be 
divided into that of aggregation and that of coalition, the former 

1 [This heading and the first paragraph added in B.] 
* [der form nach^\ 



198 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

priori. They cannot be apprehended, that is, taken up into 
empirical consciousness, save through that synthesis of the 
manifold whereby the representations of a determinate space 
or time are generated, that is, through combination of the 

B 203 homogeneous manifold and consciousness of its synthetic 
unity. Consciousness of the synthetic unity 1 of the manifold 
[and] homogeneous in intuition in general, in so far as the 
representation of an object first becomes possible by means 
of it, is, however, the concept of a magnitude (quantum). 
Thus even the perception of an object, as appearance, is only 
possible through the same synthetic unity of the manifold of 
the given sensible intuition as that whereby the unity of the 
combination of the manifold [and] homogeneous is thought 
in the concept of a magnitude. In other words, appearances 
are all without exception magnitudes, indeed extensive mag- 
nitudes. As intuitions in space or time, they must be repre- 
sented through the same synthesis whereby space and time 
in general are determined. 

I entitle a magnitude extensive when the representation 
of the parts makes possible, and therefore necessarily precedes, 
the representation of the whole. I cannot represent to myself 
a line, however small, without drawing it in thought, that 

A 163 is, generating from a point all its parts one after another. 
Only in this way can the intuition be obtained. Similarly 
with all times, however small. In these I think to myself 
only that successive advance from one moment to another, 
whereby through the parts of time and their addition a de- 
terminate time-magnitude is generated. As the [element of] 

applying to extensive and the latter to intensive quantities. The 
second mode of combination (nexus) is the synthesis of the manifold 
so far as its constituents necessarily belong to one another &gt; as, for 
example, the accident to some substance, or the effect to the cause. 
It is therefore synthesis of that which, though heterogeneous, is yet 
represented as combined a priori. This combination, as not being 
arbitrary and as concerning the connection of the existence of the 
B 202 manifold, I entitle dynamical. Such connection can itself, in turn, 
be divided into the physical connection of the appearances with one 
another, and their metaphysical connection in the a priori faculty of 
knowledge. 

1 [Adding, with Vaihinger, der synthetischen Einheit]. 



AXIOMS OF INTUITION 199 

pure intuition in all appearances is either space or time, every 
appearance is as intuition an extensive magnitude; only B 204 
through successive synthesis of part to part in [the process of] 
its apprehension can it come to be known. All appearances 
are consequently intuited as aggregates, as complexes of 
previously given parts. This is not the case with magnitudes 
of every kind, but only with those magnitudes which are 
represented and apprehended by us in this extensive fashion. 

The mathematics of space 1 (geometry) is based upon this 
successive synthesis of the productive imagination in the 
generation of figures. This is the basis of the axioms which 
formulate the conditions of sensible a priori intuition under 
which alone the schema of a pure concept of outer appear- 
ance can arise for instance, that between two points only 
one straight line is possible, or that two straight lines cannot 
enclose a space, etc. These are the axioms which, strictly, 
relate only to magnitudes (quanta) as such. 

As regards magnitude (quantitas), that is, as regards 
the answer to be given to the question, 'What is the magnitude 
of a thing?' there are no axioms in the strict meaning of the A 164 
term * although there are a number of propositions which are 
synthetic and immediately certain (indemonstrabilia). The 
propositions, that if equals be added to equals the wholes 
are equal, and if equals be taken from equals the remainders 
are equal, are analytic propositions; for I am immediately 
conscious of the identity of the production of the one magni- 
tude with the production of the other. [Consequently, they B 205 
are not] axioms, [for these] have to be a priori synthetic pro- 
positions. On the other hand, the evident propositions of 
numerical relation are indeed synthetic, but are not general 2 
like those of geometry, and cannot, therefore, be called axioms 
but only numerical formulas. The assertion that 7 + 5 is equal 
to 12 is not an analytic proposition. For neither in the repre- 
sentation of 7, nor in that of 5, nor in the representation of the 
combination of both, do I think the number 12. (That I must 
do so in the addition of the two numbers is not to the point, 
since in the analytic proposition the question is only whether 
I actually think the predicate in the representation of the 
subject.) But although the proposition is synthetic, it is also 

1 [Ausdehnung.] * \nicht allgemcin, i,e. are specific.] 



200 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

only singular. So far as we are here attending merely to the 
synthesis of the homogeneous (of units), that synthesis can 
take place only in one way, although the employment of 
these numbers is general. If I assert that through three 
lines, two of which taken together are greater than the 
third, a triangle can be described, I have expressed merely 

A 165 the function of productive imagination whereby the lines 
can be drawn greater or smaller, and so can be made to 
meet at any and every possible angle. The number 7, on the 
other hand, is possible only in one way. So also is the 
number 12, as thus generated through the synthesis of 7 
with 5. Such propositions must not, therefore, be called 

B 206 axioms (that would involve recognition of an infinite number 
of axioms), but numerical formulas. 

This transcendental principle of the mathematics of ap- 
pearances greatly enlarges our a priori knowledge. For it alone 
can make pure mathematics, in its complete precision, appli- 
cable to objects of experience. Without this principle, such 
application would not be so self-evident; and there has indeed 
been much confusion of thought in regard to it. Appear- 
ances are not things in themselves. Empirical intuition is 
possible only by means of the pure intuition of space and of 
time. What geometry asserts of pure intuition is therefore 
undeniably valid of empirical intuition. The idle objections, 
that objects of the senses may not conform to such rules of 
construction in space as that of the infinite divisibility of lines 
or angles, must 1 be given up. For if these objections hold good, 
we deny the objective validity of space, and consequently of 
all mathematics, and no longer know why and how far 
mathematics can be applicable to appearances. The synthesis 
of spaces and times, being a synthesis of the essential forms 2 

A 166 of all intuition, is what makes possible the apprehension of 
appearance, and consequently every outer experience and all 
knowledge of the objects of such experience. Whatever pure 
mathematics establishes in regard to the synthesis of the form 
of apprehension is also necessarily valid of the objects appre- 
hended. All objections are only the chicanery of a falsely 

1 [Reading, with Kehrbach, durjen, mussen for diirfe, muss.] 
* [Reading, with Erdmann, der wesentlichen Formen for der wesentlichen 
Form.] 



ANTICIPATIONS OF PERCEPTION 201 

instructed reason, which, erroneously professing to isolate the B 207 
objects of the senses from the formal condition of our sen- 
sibility, represents them, in spite of the fact that they are mere 
appearances, as objects in themselves, given to the understand- 
ing. Certainly, on that assumption, no synthetic knowledge 
of any kind could be obtained of them a priori, and nothing 
therefore could be known of them synthetically through pure 
concepts of space. Indeed, the science which determines these 
concepts, namely geometry, would not itself be possible. 



ANTICIPATIONS OF PERCEPTION* 

In all appearances, the real that is an object of sensation 
has intensive magnitude, that is, a degree. 

Proof* 

Perception is empirical consciousness, that is, a conscious- 
ness in which sensation is to be found. Appearances, as objects 
of perception, are not pure, merely formal, intuitions, like space 
and time. For in and by themselves these latter cannot be per- 
ceived. Appearances contain in addition to intuition the matter 
for some object in general (whereby something existing in space 
or time is represented); they contain, that is to say, the real 
of sensation as merely subjective representation, which gives 
us only the consciousness that the subject is affected, and 
which we relate to an object in general. Now from empirical B 208 
consciousness to pure consciousness a graduated transition 
is possible, the real in the former completely vanishing and a 
merely formal a priori consciousness of the manifold in space 
and time remaining. Consequently there is also possible a 

* [In A:] 

The Anticipations of Perception 

The principle which anticipates all perceptions, as such, is 
as follows: In all appearances sensation, and the real which 
corresponds to it in the object (realitas phaenomenori), has an 
intensive magnitude, that is, a degree. 

1 [This heading and the first paragraph added in B.] 



202 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

synthesis in the process of generating the magnitude of a sen- 
sation from its beginning in pure intuition = o, up to any 
required magnitude. Since, however, sensation is not in itself 
an objective representation, and since neither the intuition 
of space nor that of time is to be met with in it, its mag- 
nitude is not extensive but intensive. This magnitude is 
generated in the act of apprehension whereby the empirical 
consciousness of it can in a certain time increase from nothing 
= o to the 1 given measure. Corresponding to this intensity 
of sensation, an intensive magnitude, that is, a degree of 
influence on the sense [i.e. on the special sense involved], 
must be ascribed to all objects of perception, in so far as 
the perception contains sensation. 

All knowledge by means of which I am enabled to know 
and determine a priori what belongs to empirical knowledge 
may be entitled an anticipation; and this is undoubtedly the 
A 167 sense in which Epicurus employed the term TrpoXytyi,?. But as 
B 209 there is an element in the appearances (namely, sensation, the 
matter of perception) which can never be known a priori ', and 
which therefore constitutes the distinctive difference between 
empirical and a priori knowledge, it follows that sensation is 
just that element which cannot be anticipated. On the other 
hand, we might very well entitle the pure determinations in 
space and time, in respect of shape as well as of magnitude, 
anticipations of appearances, since they represent a priori that 
which may always be given a posteriori in experience. If, 
however, there is in every sensation, as sensation in general 
(that is, without a particular sensation having to be given), 
something that can be known a priori, this will, in a quite 
especial sense, deserve to be named anticipation. For it does 
indeed seem surprising that we should forestall experience, 
precisely in that which concerns what is only to be obtained 
through it, namely, its matter. Yet, none the less, such is 
actually the case. 

Apprehension by means merely of sensation occupies only 
an instant, 2 if, that is, I do not take into account the succes- 
sion of different sensations. As sensation is that element in 

1 [Taking, with Erdmann, ihrem as referring, not to Bewusstsein, but to 
Empfindung.] 
8 [Augenbluk.] 



ANTICIPATIONS OF PERCEPTION 203 

the [field of] appearance the apprehension of which does not 
involve a successive synthesis proceeding from parts to the 
whole representation, it has no extensive magnitude. The 
absence of sensation at that instant would involve the re- 
presentation of the instant as empty, therefore as = o. Now A 168 
what corresponds in empirical intuition to sensation is reality 
(realitas phaenomenon)\ what corresponds to its absence is 
negation = o. Every sensation, however, is capable of diminu- B 210 
tion, so that it can decrease and gradually vanish. Between 
reality in the [field of] appearance and negation there is there- 
fore a continuity 1 of many possible intermediate sensations, 
the difference between any two of which is always smaller than 
the difference between the given sensation and zero or com- 
plete negation. In other words, the real in the [field of] ap- 
pearance has always a magnitude. But since its apprehension 
by means of mere sensation takes place in an instant and not 
through successive synthesis of different sensations, and there- 
fore does not proceed from the parts to the whole, the mag- 
nitude is to be met with only in the apprehension. 2 The real 
has therefore magnitude, but not extensive magnitude. 

A? magnitude which is apprehended only as unity, and 
in which multiplicity can be represented only through ap- 
proximation to negation = o, I entitle an intensive magnitude. 
Every reality in the [field of] appearance has therefore inten- 
sive magnitude or degree. If this reality is viewed as cause, 
either of sensation or of some other reality in the [field of] 
appearance, such as change, the degree of the reality as cause 
is then entitled a moment, 3 the moment of gravity. It is so 
named for the reason that degree signifies only that magnitude A 169 
the apprehension of which is not successive', but instan- 
taneous. 4 This, however, I touch on only in passing; for with 
causality I am not at present dealing. 

Every sensation, therefore, and likewise every reality in B2ii 
the [field of] appearance, however small it may be, has a 
degree, that is, an intensive magnitude which can always be 
diminished. Between reality and negation there is a con- 
tinuity of possible realities and of possible smaller perceptions. 

1 \ein kontinuierlicher Zusammenhang.] 

* [Reading, with Wille, welche aber nur in der Apprehension for welche aber 
nicht in der Apprehension. Cf. proof added in B, 207-8.] 

8 [ein Moment.} * \augenblicklic 'h.~\ 



204 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

Every colour, as for instance red, has a degree which, how- 
ever small it may be, is never the smallest; and so with heat, 
the moment of gravity, etc. 

The property of magnitudes by which no part of them is 
the smallest possible, that is, by which no part is simple, is 
called their continuity. Space and time are quanta continua, 
because no part of them can be given save as enclosed between 
limits (points or instants), and therefore only in such fashion 
that this part is itself again a space or a time. Space therefore 
consists solely of spaces, time solely of times. Points and instants 
are only limits, that is, mere positions which limit space and 
time. But positions always presuppose the intuitions which 
they limit or are intended to limit; and out of mere positions, 

A 170 viewed as constituents capable of being given prior to space 
or time, neither space nor time can be constructed. Such mag- 
nitudes may also be called flowing, since the synthesis of 
productive imagination involved in their production is a pro- 

B 212 gression in time, and the continuity of time is ordinarily 
designated by the term flowing or flowing away. 

All appearances, then, are continuous magnitudes, alike in 
their intuition, as extensive, and in their mere perception 
(sensation, and with it reality) as intensive. If the synthesis of 
the manifold of appearance is interrupted, we have an aggre- 
gate of different appearances, and not appearance as a genuine 
quantum. Such an aggregate 1 is not generated by continuing 
without break productive synthesis of a certain kind, but 
through repetition of an ever-ceasing synthesis. If I called 
thirteen thalers a quantum of money, I should be correct, pro- 
vided my intention is to state the value of a mark of fine silver. 
For this is a continuous magnitude, in which no part is the 
smallest, and in which every part can constitute a piece of coin 
that always contains material for still smaller pieces. But if 
I understand by the phrase thirteen round thalers, so many 
coins, quite apart from the question of what their silver 
standard may be, I then use the phrase, quantum of thalers, 
inappropriately. It ought to be entitled an aggregate, that is, 

A 171 a number of pieces of money. But as unity must be presup- 
posed in all number, appearance as unity is a quantum, and 
as a quantum is always a continuum. 

1 [Reading, with Kehrbach, welches Aggregat for welches.} 



ANTICIPATIONS OF PERCEPTION 205 

Since all appearances, alike in their extensive and in their 
intensive aspect, are thus continuous magnitudes, it might 
seem to be an easy matter to prove with mathematical con- 
clusiveness the proposition that all alteration (transition of a B 213 
thing from one state to another), is continuous. But the caus- 
ality of an alteration in general, presupposing, as it does, em- 
pirical principles, lies altogether outside the limits of a tran- 
scendental philosophy. For upon the question as to whether 
a cause capable of altering the state of a thing, that is, of 
determining it to the opposite of a certain given state, may 
be possible, the a priori understanding casts no light; and 
this not merely because it has no insight into its possibility 
(such insight is lacking to us in many other cases of a priori 
knowledge), but because alterableness is to be met with only 
in certain determinations of appearances, and because, in 
spite of the fact that the cause of these determinations lies 
in the unalterable, experience alone can teach what they are. 
Since in our present enquiry we have no data of which we 
can make use save only the pure fundamental concepts of all 
possible experience, in which there must be absolutely nothing 
that h empirical, we cannot, without destroying the unity of 
our system, anticipate general natural science, which is based A 172 
on certain primary experiences. 1 

At the same time, there is no lack of proofs of the great 
value of our principle in enabling us to anticipate perceptions, 
and even to some extent to make good their absence, by 
placing a check upon all false inferences which might be 
drawn from their absence. 

If all reality in perception has a degree, between which B 214 
and negation there exists an infinite gradation of ever smaller 
degrees, and if every sense must likewise 2 possess some par- 
ticular degree 8 of receptivity of sensations, no perception, and 
consequently no experience, is possible that could prove, 
either immediately or mediately (no matter how far-ranging 
the reasoning may be), a complete absence of all reality in the 
[field of] appearance. In other words, the proof of an empty 
space or of an empty time can never be derived from experi- 
ence. For, in the first place, the complete absence of reality 

1 \Grunderf ahrungen^ ' 
2 [Reading, with Erdmann, ebtnsowohl for gleichwohl.] 8 [i.e. limit] 



206 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

from a sensible intuition can never be itself perceived; and, 
secondly, there is no appearance whatsoever and no difference 
in the degree of reality of any appearance from which it can 
be inferred. It is not even legitimate to postulate it in order 
to explain any difference. For even if the whole intuition of a 
certain determinate space or time is real through and through, 
that is, though no part of it is empty, none the less, since every 

A *73 reality has its degree, which can diminish to nothing (the 
void) through infinite gradations without in any way altering 
the extensive magnitude of the appearance, there must be 
infinite different degrees in which space and time maybe filled. 
Intensive magnitude can in different appearances be smaller 
or greater, although the extensive magnitude of the intuition 
remains one and the same. 

B 215 Let us give an example. Almost all natural philosophers, 
observing partly by means of the moment of gravity or 
weight, partly by means of the moment of opposition to other 
matter in motion a great difference in the quantity of various 
kinds of matter in bodies that have the same volume, unani- 
mously conclude that this volume, which constitutes the ex- 
tensive magnitude of the appearance, must in all material 
bodies be empty in varying degrees. Who would ever have 
dreamt of believing that these students of nature, most of 
whom are occupied with problems in mathematics and 
mechanics, would base such an inference solely on a meta- 
physical presupposition the sort of assumption they so stoutly 
profess to avoid? They assume that the real in space (I may 
not here name it impenetrability or weight, since these are 
empirical concepts) is everywhere uniform and varies only 
in extensive magnitude, that is, in amount. Now to this pre- 
supposition, for which they could find no support in experi- 

A 174 ence, and which is therefore purely metaphysical, I oppose a 
transcendental proof, which does not indeed explain the 
difference in the filling of spaces, but completely destroys the 
supposed necessity of the above presupposition, that the 
difference is only to be explained on the assumption of empty 
space. My proof has the merit at least of freeing the under- 
standing, so that it is at liberty to think this difference in 

B 216 some other manner, should it be found that some other 
hypothesis is required for the explanation of the natural 



ANTICIPATIONS OF PERCEPTION 207 

appearances. For we then recognise that although two equal 
spaces can be completely filled with different kinds of 
matter, so that there is no point in either where matter is 
not present, nevertheless every reality has, according to its 
quality, some specific degree (of resistance or weight) which 
can, without diminution of its extensive magnitude or amount, 
become smaller and smaller in infinitum, before it passes 
into the void and [so] vanishes [out of existence]. Thus a 
radiation which fills a space, as for instance heat, and 
similarly every other reality in the [field of] appearance, 
can diminish in its degree in infinitum, without leaving 
the smallest part of this space in the least empty. It may 
fill the space just as completely with these smaller degrees as 
another appearance does with greater degrees. I do not at all 
intend to assert that this is what actually occurs when material 
bodies differ in specific gravity, but only to establish from a 
principle of pure understanding that the nature of our per- A 175 
ceptions allows of such a mode of explanation, that we are 
not justified in assuming the real in appearances to be uniform 
in degree, differing only in aggregation and extensive magni- 
tude, end that we are especially in error when we claim that 
such interpretation can be based on an a priori principle of 
the understanding. 

This anticipation of perception must always, however, B 217 
appear somewhat strange to anyone trained in transcend- 
ental reflection, 1 and to any student of nature who by such 
teaching has been trained to circumspection. The assertion 
that the understanding anticipates 2 such a synthetic principle, 
ascribing a degree to all that is real in the appearances, and 
so asserting the possibility of an internal distinction in sensa- 
tion itself (abstraction being made of its empirical quality), 
awakens doubts and difficulties. It is therefore a question 
not unworthy of solution, how the understanding can thus in 
a priori fashion pronounce synthetically upon appearances, 
and can indeed anticipate in that which in itself is merely 
empirical and concerns only sensation. 

The quality of sensation, as for instance in colours, taste, 
etc., is always merely empirical, and cannot be represented 



1 [Adding, with Erdmann, Uberlegung.} 
1 [Adding, with Hartenstein, antizipiert.} 



208 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

a priori. But the real, which corresponds to sensations in 
general, as opposed to negation - o, represents only that 
something the very concept of which includes being, and 

A 176 signifies nothing but the synthesis in an empirical conscious- 
ness in general. Empirical consciousness can in inner sense 
be raised from o to any higher degree, so that a certain ex- 
tensive magnitude of intuition, as for instance of illuminated 
surface, may excite as great a sensation as the combined 
aggregate of many 1 such surfaces less illuminated. [Since the 
extensive magnitude of the appearance thus varies independ- 

B 218 ently], we can completely abstract from it, and still represent 
in the mere sensation in any one of its moments a synthesis 
that advances uniformly from o to the given empirical con- 
sciousness. Consequently, though all sensations as such are 
given only a posteriori? their property of possessing a degree 
can be known a priori. It is remarkable that of magnitudes 
in general we can know a priori only a single quality ', namely, 
that of continuity, and that in all quality (the real in appear- 
ances) we can know a priori nothing save [in regard to] 
their intensive quantity, namely that they have degree. 
Everything else has to be left to experience. 

3 
ANALOGIES OF EXPERIENCE * 

The principle of the analogies is: Experience is possible 
only through the representation of a necessary connection 
of perceptions. 

Proof* 

Experience is an empirical knowledge, that is, a know- 
ledge which determines an object through perceptions. It 

* [In A:] 

The Analogies of Experience 

The general principle of the analogies is: All appearances 
A 177 are, as regards their existence, subject a priori to rules deter- 
mining their relation to one another in one time. 

1 [Reading, with Erdmann, vie/en for vielem.} 
3 [Reading, with Mellin, a posteriori for a priori^ 
* [This heading and the first paragraph added in B.] 



ANALOGIES OF EXPERIENCE 209 

is a synthesis of perceptions, not contained in perception but 
itself containing in one consciousness the synthetic unity of 
the manifold of perceptions. This synthetic unity constitutes 
the essential in any knowledge of objects of the senses, that is, 
in experience as distinguished from mere intuition or sensa- B 219 
tion of the senses. In experience, however, perceptions come 
together only in accidental order, so that no necessity deter- 
mining their connection is or can be revealed in the perceptions 
themselves. For apprehension is only a placing together of the 
manifold of empirical intuition; and we can find in it no re- 
presentation of any necessity which determines the appearances 
thus combined to have connected existence in space and time. 
But since experience is a knowledge of objects through percep- 
tions, the relation [involved] in the existence of the manifold has 
to be represented in experience, not as it comes to be constructed 1 
in time but as it exists objectively in time. Since time, however, 
cannot itself be perceived, the determination of the existence 
of objects in time can take place only through their relation in 
time in general, and therefore only through concepts that con- 
nect them a priori. Since these always carry necessity with 
them, tit follows that experience is only possible through a re- 
presentation of necessary connection of perceptions. 

The three modes of time are duration, succession, and co- 
existence. There will, therefore, be three rules of all relations 
of appearances in time, and these rules will be prior to all ex- 
perience, and indeed make it possible. By means of these rules 
the existence of every appearance can be determined in respect 
of the unity of all time. 

The general principle of the three analogies rests on the B 220 
necessary unity of apperception, in respect of all possible em- 
pirical consciousness, that is, of all perception, at every \instant 
of] time. And since this unity lies a priori at the foundation 
of empirical consciousness, it follows that the above principle 
rests on the synthetic unity of all appearances as regards their 
relation in time. For the original apperception stands in rela- 
tion to inner sense (the sum of all representations), and indeed 
a priori to its form, that is, to the time-order of the manifold 
empirical consciousness. All this manifold must, as regards 
its time-relations, be united in the original apperception. This 

1 \wie es in der Zeit zusammengestellt z'st.] 



210 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

is demanded by the a priori transcendental unity of appercep- 
tion, to which everything that is to belong to my knowledge 
(that is, to my unified l knowledge), and so can be an object for 
me, has to conform. This synthetic unity in the time-relations 
of all perceptions, as thus determined a priori, is the law, that 

A 178 all empirical time-determinations must stand under rules of 
universal time-determination. The analogies of experience, with 
which we are now to deal, must be rules of this description. 

These principles have this peculiarity, that they are not 
concerned with appearances and the synthesis of their em- 
pirical intuition, but only with the existence of such appearances 
and their relation to one another in respect of their existence. 

B 221 The manner in which something is apprehended in appear- 
ance can be so determined a priori that the rule of its synthesis 
can at once give, that is to say, can bring into being, this 
[element of] a priori intuition in every example that comes 
before us empirically. The existence of appearances cannot, 
however, be thus known a priori] and even granting that we 
could in any such manner contrive to infer that something 
exists, we could not know it determinately, could not, that is, 
anticipate the features through which its empirical intuition is 
distinguished from other intuitions. 

The two previous principles, which, as justifying 2 the ap- 
plication of mathematics to appearances, I entitled the mathe- 
matical, referred to the possibility of appearances, and taught 
how, alike as regards their intuition and the real in their per- 
ception, they can be generated according to rules of a mathe- 
matical synthesis. Both principles justify us in employing 
numerical magnitudes, and so enable us to determine appear- 

A 179 ance as magnitude. For instance, I can determine a priori , that 
is, can construct, the degree of sensations of sunlight by com- 
bining some 200,000 illuminations of the moon. These first 
principles may therefore be called constitutive. 

It stands quite otherwise with those principles which seek 

B 222 to bring the existence of appearances under rules a priori. 
For since existence cannot be constructed, the principles can 
apply only to the relations of existence, and can yield only re- 
gulative principles. We cannot, therefore, expect either axioms 

1 [meinem einigen.] 
* [Reading, with Erdmann, berechtigen for berechtigten.] 



ANALOGIES OF EXPERIENCE 211 

or anticipations. If, however, a perception is given in a time- 
relation to some other perception, then even although this 
latter is indeterminate, and we consequently cannot decide 
what it is, or what its magnitude may be, we may none the 
less assert that in its existence it is necessarily connected 
with the former in this mode of time. In philosophy analogies 
signify something very different from what they represent in 
mathematics. In the latter they are formulas which express 
the equality of two quantitative relations, and are always con- 
stitutive; so that if three l members of the proportion are given, 
the fourth 2 is likewise given, that is, can be constructed. But 
in philosophy the analogy is not the equality of two quantitative 
but of two qualitative relations; and from three given mem- 
bers we can obtain a priori knowledge only of the relation to a A 180 
fourth, not of the fourth member itself. The relation yields, how- 
ever, a rule for seeking the fourth member in experience, and 
a mark whereby it can be detected. An analogy of experience 
is, therefore, only a rule according to which a unity of experi- 
ence may arise from perception. It does not tell us how mere 
perception or empirical intuition in general itself comes about. 
It is not a principle constitutive of the objects, that is, of the 
appearances, but only regulative. The same can be asserted of B 223 
the postulates of empirical thought in general, which concern 
the synthesis of mere intuition (that is, of the form of appear- 
ance), of perception (that is, of the matter of perception), and 
of experience (that is, of the relation of these perceptions). 
They are merely regulative principles, and are distinguished 
from the mathematical, which are constitutive, not indeed in 
certainty both have certainty a priori but in the nature of 
their evidence, that is, as regards the character of the intuitive 
(and consequently of the demonstrative) factors peculiar to 
the latter. 

In this connection what has been said of all principles that 
are synthetic must be specially emphasised, namely, that these 
analogies have significance and validity only as principles of 
the empirical, not of the transcendental, employment of under- 
standing; that only as such can they be established; and that A 181 
appearances have therefore to be subsumed, not simply 3 under 

1 [Reading, with Mellin, drei for zwei.] 
8 [Reading, with Mellin, vierte for dritte.] 8 [schlechthin.] 



212 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

the categories, but under their schemata. For if the objects 
to which these principles are to be related were things in them- 
selves, it would be altogether impossible to know anything of 
them synthetically a priori. They are, however, nothing but 
appearances; and complete knowledge of them, in the further- 
ance of which the sole function of a priori principles must 
ultimately consist, is simply our possible experience of them. 
The principles can therefore have no other purpose save that 
B 224 of being the conditions of the unity of empirical knowledge in 
the synthesis of appearances. But such unity can be thought 
only in the schema of the pure concept of understanding. The 
category expresses a function which is restricted by no sensible 
condition, and contains the unity of this schema, 1 [in so far 
only] as [it is the schema] of a synthesis in general. By these 
principles, then, we are justified in combining appearances 
only according to what is no more than an analogy with the 
logical and universal unity of concepts. In the principle itself 
we do indeed make use of the category, but in applying it to 
appearances we substitute for it 2 its schema as the key to its 
employment, or rather set it alongside the category, as its re- 
stricting condition, and as being what may be called its formula. 



A 182 A 

FIRST ANALOGY 

Principle of Permanence of Substance* 

In all change of appearances substance is permanent; its 
quantum in nature is neither increased nor diminished.* 

* [In A:] 

All appearances contain the permanent (substance) as the 
object itself, and the transitory 4 as its mere determination, 
that is, as a way 5 in which the object exists. 

[Reading, with Kehrbach, dessen for deren.} 

[Reading, with Max Miiiler, den . . . derersteren for dessen . . . des ersteren.] 

['of substance' added in B,] 

[das Wandelbarc.\ 

\eine Art.\ 



FIRST ANALOGY 213 

Proof* 

All appearances are in time; and in it alone, as substrate 
(as permanent form of inner intuition), can either coexistence 
or succession be represented. Thus the time in which all 
change of appearances has to be thought, remains and does B 225 
not change. For it is that in which, and as determinations of 
which, succession or coexistence can alone be represented. 
Now time cannot by itself be perceived. Consequently there 
must be found in the objects of perception, that is, in the 
appearances, the substrate which represents time in general; 
and all change or coexistence must, in being apprehended, 
be perceived in this substrate, and through relation of the 
appearances to it. But the substrate of all that is real, that is, 
of all that belongs to the existence of things, is substance ; 
and all that belongs to existence can be thought only as a 
determination of substance. Consequently the permanent, in 
relation to which alone all time-relations of appearances can 
be determined, is substance in the [field of] appearance, that 
is, the real in appearance, and as the substrate of all change 
remains ever the same. And as it is thus unchangeable in 
its existence, its quantity in nature can be neither increased nor 
diminished. 

Our apprehension of the manifold of appearance is always 
successive, and is therefore always changing. Through it alone 
we can never determine whether this manifold, as object of 
experience, is coexistent or successive. For such determination 
we require an underlying ground which exists at all times, that 
is, something abiding and permanent^ of which all change B 226 
and coexistence are only so many ways (modes of time) in 
which the permanent exists. And simultaneity and succes- 

* [This heading and the first paragraph substituted in B for:] 
Proof of this first Analogy 

All appearances are in time. Time can determine them as 
existing in a twofold manner, either as in succession to one 
another or as coexisting. Time, in respect of the former, is 
viewed as time-series, in respect of the latter as time-volume. 1 

1 \Zcitumf angl\ 



214 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

sion being the only relations in time, it follows that only in 
A 183 the permanent are relations of time possible. In other words, 
the permanent is the substratum of the empirical representa- 
tion of time itself; in it alone is any determination of time 
possible. Permanence, as the abiding correlate of all existence 
of appearances, of all change and of all concomitance, ex- 
presses time in general. For change does not affect time itself, 
but only appearances in time. (Coexistence is not a mode of 
time itself; for none of the parts of time coexist; they are all 
in succession to one another.) If we ascribe succession to time 
itself, we must think yet another time, in which the sequence 
would be possible. Only through the permanent does existence 
in different parts of the time-series acquire a magnitude which 
can be entitled duration. For in bare succession existence is 
always vanishing and recommencing, and never has the least 
magnitude. Without the permanent there is therefore no time- 
relation. Now time cannot be perceived in itself; the permanent 
in the appearances is therefore the substratum of all deter- 
mination of time, and, as likewise follows, is also the condition 
of the possibility of all synthetic unity of perceptions, that is, 
B 227 of experience. All existence and all change in time have v thus 
to be viewed as simply a mode of the existence of that which 
remains and persists. In all appearances the permanent is the 
object itself, that is, substance as phenomenon; everything, on 
A 184 the other hand, which changes or can change belongs only to 
the way in which substance or substances exist, and therefore 
to their determinations. 

I find that in all ages, not only philosophers, but even 
the common understanding, has recognised this permanence 
as a substratum of all change of appearances, and always 
assume it to be indubitable. The only difference in this matter 
between the common understanding and the philosopher is 
that the latter expresses himself somewhat more definitely, 
asserting that throughout all changes in the world substance 
remains, and that only the accidents change. But I nowhere 
find even the attempt at a proof of this obviously synthetic 
proposition. Indeed, it is very seldom placed, where it truly 
belongs, at the head of those laws of nature which are pure 
and completely a priori. Certainly the proposition, that sub- 
stance is permanent, is tautological. For this permanence is 



FIRST ANALOGY 215 

our sole ground for applying the category of substance to 
appearance; and we ought first to have proved that in all 
appearances there is something permanent, and that the tran- 
sitory is nothing but determination of its existence. But such 
a proof cannot be developed dogmatically, that is, from con- B 228 
cepts, since it concerns a synthetic a priori proposition. Yet 
as it never occurred to anyone that such propositions are 
valid only in relation to possible experience, and can therefore 
be proved only through a deduction of the possibility of ex- A 185 
perience, we need not be surprised that though the above 
principle is always postulated as lying at the basis of ex- 
perience (for in empirical knowledge the need of it is felt), it 
has never itself been proved. 

A philosopher, on being asked how much smoke weighs, 
made reply: "Subtract from the weight of the wood burnt 
the weight of the ashes which are left over, and you have the 
weight of the smoke". He thus presupposed as undeniable 
that even in fire the matter (substance) does not vanish, but 
only suffers an alteration of form. The proposition, that noth- 
ing arises out of nothing, is still another consequence of the 
principle of permanence, or rather of the ever-abiding exist- 
ence, in the appearances, of the subject proper. For if that in 
the [field of] appearance which we name substance is to be 
the substratum proper of all time-determination, it must 
follow that all existence, whether in past or in future time, 
can be determined solely in and by it. We can therefore give 
an appearance the title 'substance' just for the reason that we 
presuppose its existence throughout all time, and that this is not 
adequately expressed by the word permanence, a term which B 229 
applies chiefly to future time. But since the inner necessity of 
persisting is inseparably bound up with the necessity of always 
having existed, the expression [principle of permanence] may 
be allowed to stand. Gigni de nihilo nihil, in nihilum nil A 186 
posse reverti, were two propositions which the ancients al- 
ways connected together, but which are now sometimes mis- 
takenly separated owing to the belief that they apply to things 
in themselves, and that the first would run counter to the 
dependence of the world even in respect of its substance - 
upon a supreme cause. But such apprehension is unneces- 
sary. For we have here to deal only with appearances in the 



216 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

field of experience; 1 and the unity of experience would never 
be possible if we were willing to allow that new things, that is, 
new substances, could come into existence. For we should then 
lose that which alone can represent the unity of time, namely, 
the identity of the substratum, wherein alone all change has 
thoroughgoing unity. This permanence is, however, simply 
the mode in which we represent to ourselves the existence of 
things in the [field of] appearance. 

The determinations of a substance, which are nothing but 
special ways in which it exists, are called accidents. They are 
always real, because they concern the existence of substance. 
(Negations are only determinations which assert 2 the non- 
existence of something in substance.) If we ascribe a special 

B 230 [kind of] existence to this real in substance (for instance, to 
motion, as an accident of matter), this existence is entitled 
inherence, in distinction from the existence of substance which 

A 187 is entitled subsistence. But this occasions many misunder- 
standings ; it is more exact and more correct to describe an 
accident as being simply the way in which the existence of 
a substance is positively determined. But since it is unavoid- 
able, owing to the conditions of the logical employment of our 
understanding, to separate off, as it were, that which in the 
existence of a substance can change while the substance still 
remains, and to view this variable element in relation to the 
truly permanent and radical, 3 this category has to be assigned 
a place among the categories of relation, but rather as the 
condition of relations than as itself containing a relation. 

The correct understanding of the concept of alteration* is 
also grounded upon [recognition of] this permanence. Coming 
to be and ceasing to be are not alterations of that which comes 
to be or ceases to be. Alteration is a way of existing which 
follows upon another way of existing of the same object. All 
that alters 6 persists, and only its state changes* Since this 
change thus concerns only the determinations, which can 
cease to be or begin to be, we can say, using what may seem 
a somewhat paradoxical expression, that only the permanent 

1 [This is one of the few instances in which Kant employs the phrase im 
Felde der Erfahrung in place of the more usual in der Erfahrung.] 
8 [attsdrucken.} 

3 [auf das ei gent lie he Beharrliche und Radikale^ 
* [ Verdnderung.] 6 \sich verdndert.] e \wechselt. .] 



FIRST ANALOGY 217 

(substance) is altered, and that the transitory suffers no 6231 
alteration but only a change^ inasmuch as certain determina- 
tions cease to be and others begin to be. 

Alteration can therefore be perceived only in substances. A A 188 
coming to be or ceasing to be that is not simply a determination 
of the permanent but is absolute, can never be a possible per- 
ception. For this permanent is what alone makes possible the 
representation of the transition from one state to another, and 
from not-being to being. These transitions can be empirically 
known only as changing determinations of that which is per- 
manent. If we assume that something absolutely begins to be, 
we must have a point of time in which it was not. But to what 
are we to attach this point, if not to that which already exists ? 
For a preceding empty time is not an object of perception. 
But if we connect the coming to be with things which pre- 
viously existed, and which persist in existence up to the 
moment of this coming to be, this latter must be simply a de- 
termination of what is permanent in that which precedes it. 1 
Similarly also with ceasing to be; it presupposes the empirical 
representation of a time in which an appearance no longer 
exist's. 

Substances, in the [field of] appearance, are the substrata 
of all determinations of time. If some of these substances could 
come into being and others cease to be, the one condition of 
the empirical unity of time would be removed. The appear- 
ances would then relate to two different times, and existence B 232 
would flow in two parallel streams which is absurd. There 
is only one time in which all different times must be located, A 189 
not as coexistent but as in succession to one another. 

Permanence is thus a necessary condition under which 
alone appearances are determinable as things or objects in a 
possible experience. We shall have occasion in what follows 
to make such observations as may seem necessary in regard 
to the empirical criterion of this necessary permanence the 
criterion, consequently, of the substantiality of appearances. 

1 [Literally: of the former, as of the permanent.] 



218 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

B 

SECOND ANALOGY 

Principle of Succession in Time, in accordance with the 
Law of Causality * 

All alterations take place in conformity with the law of the 
connection of cause and effect. 

Proof 

2 (The preceding principle has shown that all appearances 
of succession in time are one and all only alterations, that is, 
a successive being and not-being of the determinations of 
substance which abides; and therefore that the being of 
substance as following on its not-being, or its not-being as 
B 233 following upon its being cannot be admitted in other words, 
that there is no coming into being or passing away of sub- 
stance itself. Still otherwise expressed the principle is, that 
all change (succession) of appearances is merely alteration. 
Coming into being and passing away of substance are not 
alterations of it, since the concept of alteration presupposes 
one and the same subject as existing with two opposite deter- 
minations, and therefore as abiding. With this preliminary 
reminder, we pass to the proof.) 

I perceive that appearances follow one another, that is, that 
there is a state of things at one time the opposite of which was 
in the preceding time. 3 Thus I am really connecting two percep- 
tions in time. Now connection is not the work 4 of mere sense 
and intuition, but is here the product of a synthetic faculty 
of imagination, which determines inner sense in respect of the 
time-relation. But imagination can connect these two states 



Principle of Production * 

Everything that happens, that is, begins to be, presupposes 
something upon which it follows according to a rule. 

1 [Erzeugung.] * [The first two paragraphs added in B.] 

3 [Reading, with Wille, in voriger Zeit for im vorigen Zustande.} 

4 \Werk\ 



SECOND ANALOGY 219 

in two ways, so that either the one or the other precedes in 
time. For time cannot be perceived in itself, and what precedes 
and what follows cannot, therefore, by relation to it, be em- 
pirically determined in the object. I am conscious only that 
my imagination sets the one state before and the other after, 
not that the one state precedes the other in the object. In other 
words, the objective relation of appearances that follow upon B 234 
one another is not to be determined through mere perception. 
In order that this relation be known as determined, the rela- 
tion between the two states must be so thought that it is there- 
by determined as necessary which of them must be placed 
before, and which of them after, and that they cannot be 
placed in the reverse relation. But the concept which carries 
with it a necessity of synthetic unity can only be a pure 
concept that lies in the understanding, not in perception; 
and in this case it is the concept of the relation of cause 
and effect, the former of which determines the latter in time, 
as its consequence 1 not as in a sequence that may occur 
solely in the imagination (or that may not be perceived at 
all). Experience itself in other words, empirical knowledge 
of appearances is thus possible only in so far as we subject 
the succession of appearances, and therefore all alteration, 
to the law of causality; and, as likewise follows, the appear- 
ances, as objects of experience, are themselves possible only 
in conformity with the law. 

The apprehension of the manifold of appearance is always 
successive. The representations of the parts follow upon one 
another. Whether they also follow one another in the object 
is a point which calls for further reflection, and which is not 
decided by the above statement. Everything, every repre- 
sentation even, in so far as we are conscious of it, may be 
entitled object. But it is a question for deeper enquiry what B 235 
the word ' object ' ought to signify in respect of appearances A 190 
when these are viewed not in so far as they are (as representa- 
tions) objects, but only in so far as they stand for 2 an object. The 
appearances, in so far as they are objects of consciousness 
simply in virtue of being representations, are not in any way 
distinct from their apprehension, that is, from their recep- 
tion in the synthesis of imagination; and we must therefore 

1 [als die Folge.] * \bczcichnen.] 



220 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

agree that the manifold of appearances is always generated in 
the mind successively. Now if appearances were things in them- 
selves, then since we have to deal solely with our representations, 
we could never determine from the succession of the representa- 
tions how their manifold may be connected in the object. How 
things may be in themselves, apart from the representations 
through which they affect us, is entirely outside our sphere of 
knowledge. In spite, however, of the fact that the appearances 
are not things in themselves, and yet are what alone can be 
given to us to know, in spite also of the fact that their repre- 
sentation in apprehension is always successive, I have to show 
what sort of a connection in time belongs to the manifold 
in the appearances themselves. For instance, the apprehen- 
sion of the manifold in the appearance of a house which 
stands before me is successive. The question then arises, 
whether the manifold of the house is also in itself suc- 
cessive. This, however, is what no one will grant. Now im- 

B 236 mediately I unfold the transcendental meaning of my concepts 
of an object, I realise that the house is not a thing in itself, 

A 191 but only an appearance, that is, a representation, the tran- 
scendental object of which is unknown. What, then, am I to 
understand by the question: how the manifold may be con- 
nected in the appearance itself, which yet is nothing in itself? 
That which lies in the successive apprehension is here viewed 
as representation, while the appearance which is given to 
me, notwithstanding that it is nothing but the sum of these 
representations, is viewed as their object; and my concept, 
which I derive from the representations of apprehension, has 
to agree with it. Since truth consists in the agreement of 
knowledge with the object, it will at once be seen that we can 
here enquire only regarding the formal conditions of empirical 
truth, and that appearance, in contradistinction to the repre- 
sentations of apprehension, can be represented as an object 
distinct from them only if it stands under a rule which dis- 
tinguishes it from every other apprehension and necessitates 
some one particular mode of connection of the manifold. The 
object is that in the appearance which contains the condition 
of this necessary rule of apprehension. 

Let us now proceed to our problem. That something 
happens, i.e. that something, or some state which did not pre- 



SECOND ANALOGY 221 

viously exist, comes to be, cannot be perceived 1 unless it is B 237 
preceded by an appearance which does not contain in itself this 
state. For an event 2 which should follow upon an empty time, A 192 
that is, a coming to be preceded by no state of things, is as 
little capable of being apprehended as empty time itself. Every 
apprehension of an event 3 is therefore a perception that fol- 
lows upon another perception. But since, as I have above 
illustrated by reference to the appearance of a house, this like- 
wise happens in all synthesis of apprehension, the apprehen- 
sion of an event is not yet thereby distinguished from other 
apprehensions. But, as I also note, in an appearance which 
contains a happening (the preceding state of the percep- 
tion we may entitle A, and the succeeding B) B can be 
apprehended only as following upon A; the perception A 
cannot follow upon B but only precede it. For instance, I 
see a ship move down stream. My perception of its lower 
position follows upon the perception of its position higher 
up in the stream, and it is impossible that in the appre- 
hension of this appearance the ship should first be per- 
ceived lower down in the stream and afterwards higher up. 
The ftrder in which the perceptions succeed one another in 
apprehension is in this instance determined, and to this order 
apprehension is bound down. In the previous example of a 
house my perceptions could begin with the apprehension of 
the roof and end with the basement, or could begin from below B 238 
and end above; and I could similarly apprehend the manifold 
of the empirical intuition either from right to left or from left 
to right. In the series of these perceptions there was thus no A 193 
determinate order specifying at what point 4 I must begin in 
order to connect the manifold empirically. But in the percep- 
tion of an event there is always a rule that makes the order in 
which the perceptions (in the apprehension of this appearance) 
follow upon one another a necessary order. 

In this case, therefore, we must derive the subjective suc- 
cession of apprehension from the objective succession of ap- 
pearances. Otherwise the order of apprehension is entirely 
undetermined, and does not distinguish one appearance from 
another. Since the merely subjective succession is altogether 

1 [Omitting, with Mellin, empirtsch.} a \eine Wirklichkeit^\ 

8 \einer Begcbenheit^ * [Reading, with Mellin, wo for zvenn.] 



222 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

arbitrary, it does not by itself prove anything as to the manner 
in which the manifold is connected in the object. The objective 
succession will therefore consist in that order of the manifold 
of appearance according to which, in conformity with a 
rule, the apprehension of that which happens follows upon 
the apprehension of that which precedes. Thus only can I be 
justified in asserting, not merely of my apprehension, but of 
appearance itself, that a succession is to be met with in it. 
This is only another way of saying that I cannot arrange the 
apprehension otherwise than in this very succession. 

In conformity with such a rule there must lie in that which 

B 239 precedes an event the condition of a rule according to which 
this event invariably and necessarily follows. I cannot reverse 

A 194 this order, proceeding back from the event to determine 
through apprehension that which precedes. For appearance 
never goes back from the succeeding to the preceding point 
of time, though it does indeed stand in relation to some pre- 
ceding point of time. The advance, on the other hand, from 
a given time to the determinate time that follows is a neces- 
sary advance. Therefore, since there certainly is something 
that follows |Y..that is apprehended as following], I musv refer 
it necessarily to something else which precedes it and upon 
which it follows in conformity with a rule, that is, of necessity. 
The event, as the conditioned, thus affords reliable evidence of 
some condition, and this condition is what determines the event. 
Let us suppose that there is nothing antecedent to an event, 
upon which it must follow according to rule. All succession of 
perception would then be only in the apprehension, that is, 
would be merely subjective, and would never enable us to de- 
termine objectively which perceptions are those that really 
precede and which are those that follow. We should then 
have only a play of representations, relating to no object; 
that is to say, it would not be possible through our percep- 
tion to distinguish one appearance from another as regards 
relations of time. For the succession in our apprehension 
would always be one and the same, and there would be nothing 

B 240 in the appearance which so determines it that a certain se- 
quence is rendered objectively necessary. I could 1 not then 

A 195 assert that two states follow upon one another in the [field of] 

1 [Reading, with Vaihinger, sagen kdnnen for sagen.} 



SECOND ANALOGY 223 

appearance, but only that one apprehension follows upon the 
other. That is something merely subjective, determining no 
object; and may not, therefore, be regarded as 1 knowledge of 
any object, not even of an object in the [field of] appearance. 

If, then, we experience that something happens, we in 
so doing always presuppose that something precedes it, on 
which it follows according to a rule. Otherwise I should not 
say of the object that it follows. For mere succession in my 
apprehension, if there be no rule determining the succession 
in relation to something that precedes, does not justify me 
in assuming 2 any succession in the object. I render my sub- 
jective synthesis of apprehension objective only by reference 
to a rule in accordance with which the appearances in their 
succession, that is, as they happen, are determined by the pre- 
ceding state. The experience of an event 8 \i.e. of anything as 
happening} is itself possible only on this assumption. 

This may seem to contradict all that has hitherto been 
taught in regard to the procedure of our understanding. The 
accepted view is that only through the perception and compari- 
son of events repeatedly following in a uniform manner upon 
preceding appearances are we enabled to discover a rule 
according to which certain events always follow upon certain B 241 
appearances, and that this is the way in which we are first led 
to construct for ourselves the concept of cause. Now the con- A 196 
cept, if thus formed, would be merely empirical, and the rule 
which it supplies, that everything which happens has a cause, 
would be as contingent as the experience upon which it is 
based. Since the universality and necessity of the rule would 
not be grounded a priori, but only on induction, they would 
be merely fictitious and without genuinely universal validity. 
It is with these, as with other pure a priori representations 
for instance, space and time. We can extract clear concepts 
of them from experience, only because we have put them into 
experience, and because experience is thus itself brought 
about only by their means. Certainly, the logical clearness of 
this representation of a rule determining the series of events is 
possible only after we have employed it in experience. Never- 

1 [Reading, with Hartenstein,/V for vor.} 

2 [Adding, with Erdmann, anzunchmen.] 

3 [von etwas, was geschieht^\ 



224 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

theless, recognition of the rule, as a condition of the synthetic 
unity of appearances in time, has been the ground of ex- 
perience itself, and has therefore preceded it a priori. 

We have, then, to show, in the case under consideration, 
that we never, even in experience, ascribe succession (that is, 
the happening of some event which previously did not exist) 
to the object, and so distinguish it from subjective sequence 

B 242 in our apprehension, except when there is an underlying rule 
which compels us to observe this order of perceptions rather 

A 197 than any other; nay, that this compulsion is really what first 
makes possible the representation of a succession in the object. 
We have representations in us, and can become conscious 
of them. But however far this consciousness may extend, and 
however careful and accurate it may be, they still remain mere 
representations, that is, inner determinations of our mind in 
this or that relation of time. How, then, does it come about 
that we posit an object for these representations, and so, in 
addition to their subjective reality, as modifications, ascribe 
to them some mysterious kind of 1 objective reality. Objective 
meaning cannot consist in the relation to another representa- 
tion (of that which we desire to entitle object 2 ), for in that case 
the question again arises, how this latter representation goes 
out beyond itself, acquiring objective meaning in addition to 
the subjective meaning which belongs to it as determination 
of the mental state. If we enquire what new character relation 
to an object confers upon our representations, what dignity they 
thereby acquire, we find that it results only in subjecting the 
representations to a rule, and so in necessitating us to connect 
them in some one specific manner; and conversely, that only 

B 243 in so far as our representations are necessitated in a certain 
order as regards their time-relations do they acquire objective 
meaning. 

A 198 In the synthesis of appearances the manifold of representa- 
tions is always successive. Now no object is hereby represented, 
since through this succession, which is common to all appre- 
hensions, nothing is distinguished from anything else. But 
immediately I perceive or assume that in this succession there 
is a relation to the preceding state, from which the representa- 

1 \ich weiss nicht, was fur eine.] 
a [Reading, with Mellin, Gegenstand for vom Gegenstande.} 



SECOND ANALOGY 225 

tion follows in conformity with a rule, I represent 1 something 
as an event, as something that happens; that is to say, I appre- 
hend 2 an object to which I must ascribe a certain determinate 
position in time a position which, in view of the preceding 
state, cannot be otherwise assigned. When, therefore, I per- 
ceive that something happens, this representation first of all 
contains [the consciousness] that there is something preceding, 
because only by reference to what precedes does the appear- 
ance acquire its time-relation, namely, that of existing after a 
preceding time in which it itself was not. But it can acquire 
this determinate position in this relation of time only in so far 
as something is presupposed in the preceding state upon which 
it follows invariably, that is, in accordance with a rule. From 
this there results a twofold consequence. In the first place, I 
cannot reverse the series, placing that which happens prior to 
that upon which it follows. And secondly, if the state which 
precedes is posited, this determinate event follows inevitably B 244 
and necessarily. The situation, then, is this: there is an order 
in our representations in which the present, so far as it has 
come to be, refers us to some preceding state as a correlate of A 199 
the event which is given; and though this correlate is, indeed, 
indeterminate, it none the less stands in a determining relation 
to the event as its consequence, connecting the event in neces- 
sary relation with itself in the time-series. 

If, then, it is a necessary law of our sensibility, and there- 
fore a formal condition of all perceptions, that the preceding 
time necessarily determines the succeeding (since I cannot ad- 
vance to the succeeding time save through the preceding), it is 
also an indispensable law of empirical representation of the 
time-series that the appearances of past time determine all 
existences in the succeeding time, and that these latter, as 
events, can take place only in so far as the appearances of past 
time determine their existence in time, that is, determine them 
according to a rule. For only in appearances can we empirically 
apprehend* this continuity in the connection of times. 

Understanding is required for all experience and for its 
possibility. Its primary contribution does not consist in making 
the representation of objects clear, but in making the repre- 

1 [Reading, with Erdmann, stelle ich for stellt sick.] 
2 [erkenne.] 8 [erkennen.] 



226 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

sentation of an object possible at all. This it does by carrying 

B 245 the time-order over into the appearances and their existence. 
For to each of them, [viewed] as [a] consequent, it assigns, 
through relation to the preceding appearances, a position de- 
termined a priori in time. Otherwise, they would not accord 

A 200 with time itself, which [in] a priori [fashion] determines the 
position of all its parts. Now since absolute time is not an ob- 
ject of perception, this determination of position cannot be de- 
rived from the relation of appearances to it. On the contrary, 
the appearances must determine for one another their position 
in time, and make their 1 time-order a necessary order. In other 
words, that which follows or happens must follow in con- 
formity with a universal rule upon that which was contained in 
the preceding state. A series of appearances thus arises which, 
with the aid of 2 the understanding, produces and makes neces- 
sary the same order and continuous connection in the series 
of possible perceptions as is met with a priori in time the 
form of inner intuition wherein all perceptions must have a 
position. 

That something happens is, therefore, a perception which 
belongs to a possible experience. This experience becomes 
actual when I regard the appearance as determined in its posi- 
tion in time, and therefore as an object that can always be 
found in the connection of perceptions in accordance with a 

B 246 rule. This rule, by which we determine something according to 
succession of time, is, that the condition under which an event 
invariably and necessarily follows is to be found in what pre- 

A 201 cedes the event. The principle of sufficient reason is thus the 
ground of possible experience, that is, of objective knowledge 
of appearances in respect of their relation in the succession of 
time. 

The proof of this principle rests on the following considera- 
tions. 8 All empirical knowledge involves the synthesis of the 
manifold by the imagination. This synthesis is always succes- 
sive, that is, the representations in it are always sequent upon 
one another. In the imagination this sequence is not in any 
way determined in its order, as to what must precede and 
what must follow, and the series of sequent representations 

1 [Reading, with Gorland, dieselben for dieselbe.] 
2 [vermittelst.] 8 [Momenten.] 



SECOND ANALOGY 227 

can indifferently be taken either in backward or in forward 
order. But if this synthesis is a synthesis of apprehension 1 of 
the manifold of a given appearance, the order is determined 
in the object, or, to speak more correctly, is an order of suc- 
cessive synthesis that determines an object. In accordance 
with this order something must necessarily precede, and when 
this antecedent is posited, something else must necessarily 
follow. If, then, my perception is to contain knowledge of an 
event, of something as actually happening, it must be an 
empirical judgment in which we think the sequence as deter- 
mined; that is, it presupposes another appearance in time, B 247 
upon which it follows necessarily, according to a rule. Were 
it not so, were I to posit the antecedent and the event were 
not to follow necessarily thereupon, I should have to regard 
the succession as a merely subjective play of my fancy; and if 
I still represented it to myself as something objective, I should A 202 
have to call it a mere dream. Thus the relation of appearances 
(as possible perceptions) according to which the subsequent 
event, that which happens, is, as to its existence, necessarily 
determined in time by something preceding in conformity 
with a'rule in other words, the relation of cause to effect is 
the condition of the objective validity of our empirical judg- 
ments, in respect of the series of perceptions, and so of their 
empirical truth; that is to say, it is the condition of experience. 
The principle of the causal relation in the sequence of appear- 
ances is therefore also valid of 2 all objects of experience ([in 
so far as they are] under the conditions of succession), as 
being itself the ground of the possibility of such experience. 

At this point a difficulty arises with which we must at 
once deal. The principle of the causal connection among ap- 
pearances is limited in our formula to their serial succession, 
whereas it applies also to their coexistence, when cause and 
effect are simultaneous. For instance, a room is warm while 
the outer air is cool. I look around for the cause, and find a B 248 
heated stove. Now the stove, as cause, is simultaneous with its 
effect, the heat of the room. Here there is no serial succession 
in time between cause and effect. They are simultaneous, and 

1 [Wille may possibly be right in suggesting that in place of Apprehension 
we should read Apperzeption.} 

2 [Reading, with Hartenstein, von for vor.] 



228 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

A 203 yet the law is valid. The great majority of efficient natural 
causes are simultaneous with their effects, and the sequence 
in time of the latter is due only to the fact that the cause 
cannot achieve its complete effect in one moment. But in 
the moment in which the effect first comes to be, it is in- 
variably simultaneous with the causality of its cause. If the 
cause should have ceased to exist a moment before, the effect 
would never have come to be. Now we must not fail to note 
that it is the order of time, not the lapse of time, with which 
we have to reckon; the relation remains even if no time has 
elapsed. The time between the causality of the cause and its 
immediate effect may be [a] vanishing [quantity], and they 
may thus be simultaneous; but the relation of the one to the 
other will always still remain determinable in time. If I view 
as a cause a ball which impresses a hollow as it lies on a 
stuffed cushion, the cause is simultaneous with the effect. But 
I still distinguish the two through the time-relation of their 
dynamical connection. For if I lay the ball on the cushion, 
a hollow follows upon the previous flat smooth shape; but 

B 249 if (for any reason) there previously exists a hollow in the 
cushion, a leaden ball does not follow upon it. 

The sequence in time is thus the sole empirical criterion 
of an effect in its relation to the causality of the cause which 

A 204 precedes it. A glass [filled with water] is the cause of the rising 
of the water above its horizontal surface, although both ap- 
pearances are simultaneous. For immediately I draw off 
water from a larger vessel into the glass, something follows, 
namely, the alteration from the horizontal position which the 
water then had to the concave form which it assumes in the 
glass. 

Causality leads to the concept of action, this in turn to the 
concept of force, and thereby to the concept of substance. 
As my critical scheme,, which is concerned solely with the 
sources of synthetic a priori knowledge, must not be compli- 
cated through the introduction of analyses, which aim only 
at the clarification, not at the extension, of concepts, I leave 
detailed exposition of my concepts to a future system of pure 
reason. Such an analysis has already, indeed, been developed 
in considerable detail in the existing text-books. But I must 
not leave unconsidered the empirical criterion of a substance, 



SECOND ANALOGY 229 

in so far as substance appears to manifest itself not through 
permanence of appearance, but more adequately and easily 
through action. 

Wherever there is action and therefore activity and force B 250 
there is also substance, and it is in substance alone that the 
seat of this fruitful source of appearances must be sought. 
This is, so far, well said; but when we seek to explain what 
is to be understood by substance, and in so doing are careful 
to avoid the fallacy of reasoning in a circle, the discovery of 
an answer is no easy task. How are we to conclude directly A 205 
from the action to the permanence of that which acts? For 
that is an essential and quite peculiar characteristic of sub- 
stance (as phenomenon). But while according to the usual pro- 
cedure, which deals with concepts in purely analytic fashion, this 
question would be completely insoluble, it presents no such 
difficulty from the standpoint which we have been formulating. 
Action signifies the relation of the subject of causality to its 
effect. Since, now, every effect consists in that which happens, 
and so in the transitory, 1 which signifies time in its character 
of succession, its ultimate subject, as the substratum of 
everything that changes, is the permanent ', that is, substance. 
For according to the principle of causality actions are always 
the first ground of all change of appearances, and cannot 
therefore be found in a subject which itself changes, because 
in that case other actions and another subject would be re- 
quired to determine this change. For this reason action is a 
sufficient empirical criterion to establish the substantiality 
of a subject, 2 without my requiring first to go in quest of its B 251 
permanence through the comparison of perceptions. Besides, 
by such method [of comparison] we could not achieve the 
completeness required for the magnitude and strict univer- 
sality of the concept. That the first subject of the causality 
of all coming to be and ceasing to be cannot itself, in the field 
of appearances, come to be and cease to be, is an assured A 206 
conclusion which leads to [the concept of] empirical necessity 
and permanence in existence, and so to the concept of a sub- 
stance as appearance. 

When something happens, the mere coming to be, apart 
from all question of what it is that has come to be, is already in 

1 \im Wandelbaren.} a [Adding, with Wille, eines Subjektes.} 



230 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

itself a matter for enquiry. The transition from the not-being 
of a state to this state, even supposing that this state [as it 
occurs] in the [field of] appearance exhibited no quality, of 
itself demands investigation. This coming to be, as was shown 
above in the First Analogy, does not concern substance, which 
does not come to be, but its state. It is, therefore, only alteration, 
not a coming to be out of nothing. For if coming to be out of 
nothing is regarded as effect of a foreign 1 cause, it has to be 
entitled creation, and that cannot be admitted as an event 
among appearances, since its mere possibility would destroy 
the unity of experience. On the other hand, when I view all 
things not as phenomena but as things in themselves, and 

B 252 as objects of the mere understanding, then despite their 
being substances they can be regarded, in respect of their 
existence, as depending upon a foreign cause. But our 
terms would then carry with them quite other meanings, 
and would not apply to appearances as possible objects of 
experience. 

How anything can be altered, and how it should be possible 

A 207 that upon one state in a given moment an opposite state may 
follow in the next moment of this we have not, a priori, the 
least conception. For that we require knowledge of actual 
forces, which can only be given empirically, as, for instance, 
of the moving forces, or what amounts to the same thing, of 
certain successive appearances, as motions, which indicate [the 
presence of] such forces. But apart from all question of what 
the content of the alteration, that is, what the state which 
is altered, may be, the form of every alteration, the condition 
under which, as a coming to be of another state, it can alone 
take place, and so the succession of the states themselves (the 
happening 2 ), can still be considered a priori according to the 
law of causality and the conditions of time. a 

B 253 If a substance passes from one state, a, to another, b y the 
point of time of the second is distinct from that of the first, and 

It should be carefully noted that I speak not of the alteration 
of certain relations in general, but of alteration of state. Thus, when 
a body moves uniformly, it does not in any way alter its state (of 
motion); that occurs only when its motion increases or diminishes. 

1 [fremden.] 
8 [Reading, with Vaihinger, das Geschehen for das Geschehene.] 



SECOND ANALOGY 231 

follows upon it. Similarly, the second state as reality in the 
[field of] appearance differs from the first wherein it did not 
exist, as b from zero. That is to say, even l if the state b 
differed from the state a only in magnitude, the alteration 
would be a coming to be of b-a y which did not exist in the A 208 
previous state, and in respect of which it = o. 

The question therefore arises how a thing passes from one 
state = a to another b. Between two instants 2 there is al- 
ways a time, and between any two states in the two instants 
there is always a difference which has magnitude. For all parts 
of appearances are always themselves magnitudes. All transi- 
tion from one state to another therefore occurs in a time which 
is contained between two instants, of which the first deter- 
mines the state from which the thing arises, and the second 
that into which it passes. Both instants, then, are limits of the 
time of a change, and so of the intermediate state between the 
two states, and therefore as such form part of the total alteration. 
Now every alteration has a cause which evinces 8 its causality in 
the whole time in which the alteration takes place. This cause, 
therefore, does not engender the alteration suddenly, that is, at 
once br in one instant, but in a time ; so that, as the time in- B 254 
creases from the initial instant a to its completion in b, the 
magnitude of the reality (b-a) is in like manner generated 
through all smaller degrees which are contained between the 
first and the last. All alteration is thus only possible through a 
continuous action of the causality which, so far as it is uniform, 
is entitled a moment. 4 The alteration does not consist of these 
moments, but is generated by them as their effect. A 209 

That is the law of the continuity of all alteration. Its ground 
is this: that neither time nor appearance in time consists of parts 
which are the smallest [possible], and that, nevertheless, the 
state of a thing passes in its alteration through all these parts, 
as elements, to its second state. In the [field of] appearance 
there is no difference of the real that is the smallest, just as in 
the magnitude of times there is no time that is the smallest; 
and the new state of reality accordingly proceeds from the 
first wherein this reality was not, through all the infinite de- 
grees, the differences of which from one another are all smaller 
than that between o and a. 

1 [auch.] * [Augenblicken.] 5 [bewetst.] 4 [Moment.] 



232 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

While we are not concerned to enquire what utility this 
principle may have in the investigation of nature, what does 
imperatively call for investigation is the question how such a 
principle, which seems to extend our knowledge of nature, can 
be possible completely a priori. Such an enquiry cannot be dis- 
pensed with, even though direct inspection may show the prin- 

B 255 cipleto be true and [empirically] real, and though the question, 
how it should be possible, may therefore be considered super- 
fluous. For there are so many ungrounded claims to the 
extension of our knowledge through pure reason, that we must 
take it as a universal principle that any such pretension is of 
itself a ground for being always mistrustful, and that, in the 

V 210 absence of evidence afforded by a thoroughgoing deduction, 
we may not believe and assume the justice of such claims, no 
matter how clear \h^ dogmatic prooi of them may appear to be. 
All increase in empirical knowledge, and every advance of 
perception, no matter what the objects may be, whether ap- 
pearances or pure intuitions, is nothing but an extension of the 
determination of inner sense, that is, an advance in time. This 
advance in time determines everything, and is not in itself deter- 
mined through anything further. That is to say, its parts are 
given only in time, and only through the synthesis of time; they 
are 1 not given antecedently to the synthesis. For this reason 
every transition in perception to something which follows in 
time is a determination of time through the generation of this 
perception, and since time is always and in all its parts a mag- 
nitude, is likewise the generation of a perception as a magnitude 
through all degrees of which no one is the smallest, from zero 
up to its determinate degree. This reveals the possibility of 
knowing a priori a law of alterations, in respect of their form. 

B 256 We are merely anticipating our own apprehension, the formal 
condition of which, since it dwells in us prior to all appearance 
that is given, must certainly be capable of being known a priori. 
In the same manner, therefore, in which time contains the 
sensible a priori condition of the possibility of a continuous 
advance of the existing to what follows, the understanding, 

\ 211 by virtue of 2 the unity of apperception, is the a priori condi- 
tion of the possibility of a continuous determination of all posi- 
tions for the appearances in this time, through the series of 

1 [Reading, with Vaihinger, sind for ste.] a \vermitte /si.] 



THIRD ANALOGY 233 

causes and effects, the former of which inevitably lead to the 
existence of the latter, and so render the empirical knowledge 
of the time-relations valid universally for all time, and there- 
fore objectively valid. 



C 

THIRD ANALOGY 

Principle of Coexistence, in accordance with the Law of 
Reciprocity or Community 

All substances, in so far as they can be perceived to coexist in 
space, are in thoroughgoing reciprocity * 

Proof 

1 Things are coexistent when in empirical intuition the 
perceptions of them can follow upon one another recipro- B 257 
cally, which, as has been shown in the proof of the second 
principle, cannot occur in the succession of appearances. 
Thus, I can direct my perception first to the moon and then 
to the earth, or, conversely, first to the earth and then to the 
moon; and because the perceptions of these objects can follow 
each other reciprocally, I say that they are coexistent. Now 
coexistence is the existence of the manifold in one and the 
same time. But time itself cannot be perceived, and we are 
not, therefore, in a position to gather, simply from things 
being set in the same time, that their perceptions can follow 
each other reciprocally. The synthesis of imagination in 
apprehension would only reveal that the one perception is 
in the subject when the other is not there, and vice versa , 
but not that the objects are coexistent, that is, that if the one 
exists the other exists at the same time, and that it is only 
because they thus coexist that the perceptions are able to 

* [In A:] 

Principle of Community 

All substances, so far as they coexist, stand in thorough- 
going community, that is, in mutual interaction. 

1 [This paragraph added in B.] 



234 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

follow one another reciprocally. Consequently, in the case of 
things which coexist externally to one another, a pure concept 
of the reciprocal sequence of their determinations is required, 
if we are to be able to say that the reciprocal sequence of the 
perceptions is grounded in the object, and so to represent the 
coexistence as objective. But the relation of substances in 

B 258 which the one contains determinations the ground of which 
is contained in the other is the relation of influence; and 
when each substance 1 reciprocally contains the ground of the 
determinations in the other, the relation is that of community 
or reciprocity. Thus the coexistence of substances in space 
cannot be known in experience save on the assumption of 
their reciprocal interaction. This is therefore the condition 
of the possibility of the things themselves as objects of 
experience. 

Things are coexistent so far as they exist in one and the 
same time. But how do we know that they are in one and the 
same time? We do so when the order in the synthesis of ap- 
prehension of the manifold is a matter of indifference, that is, 
whether it be from A through B, C, D to E, or reversewise 
from E to A. For if they were 2 in succession to one an'other 
in time, in the order, say, which begins with A and ends in 
E, it is impossible that we should begin the apprehension in 
the perception of E and proceed backwards to A, since A 
belongs to past time and can no longer be an object of appre- 
hension. 

A 212 Now assuming that in a manifold of substances as appear- 
ances each of them is completely isolated, that is, that no one 
acts on 3 any other and receives reciprocal influences in return, 
I maintain that their coexistence would not be an object of a 

B 259 possible perception and that the existence of one could not 
lead by any path of empirical synthesis to the existence of 
another. For if we bear in mind that they would be separated 
by a completely empty space, the perception which advances 
from one to another in time would indeed, by means of a 
succeeding perception, determine the existence of the latter, 
but would not be able to distinguish whether it follows object- 

1 [Reading, with Wille, /&lt;?&lt;/* (Substanz) for dieses^ 
3 [Reading, with Wille, wdren for ware.} 
3 [Reading, with Vorlander, auf for in.] 



THIRD ANALOGY 235 

ively upon the first or whether it is not rather coexistent 
with it. 

There must, therefore, besides the mere existence of A and 
B, be something through which A determines for B its position 
in time, and also reversewise B for A, because only on this 
condition can these substances be empirically represented as 
coexisting. Now that alone which can determine the position 
of anything else in time is its cause or the cause of its de- 
terminations. Each substance (inasmuch as only in respect of 
its determinations can it be an effect 1 ) must therefore contain 
in itself the causality of certain determinations in the other 
substance, and at the same time the effects of the causality of 
that other; that is, the substances must stand, immediately or 
mediately, in dynamical community, if their coexistence is to A 21; 
be known in any possible experience. Now, in respect to the 
objects of experience, everything without which the experi- 
ence of these objects would not itself be possible is necessary. B 26* 
It is therefore necessary that all substances in the [field of] 
appearance, so far as they coexist, should stand in thorough- 
going community of mutual interaction. 

The word community is in the German language ambigu- 
ous. It may mean either communio or commercium. We here 
employ it in the latter sense, as signifying a dynamical com- 
munity, without which even local community (communio spatii) 
could never be empirically known. We may easily recognise 
from our experiences that only the continuous influences in all 
parts of space can lead our senses from one object to another. 
The light, which plays between our eye and the celestial bodies, 
produces a mediate community between us and them, and 
thereby shows 2 us that they coexist. We cannot empirically 
change our position, and perceive the change, unless matter 
in all parts of space makes perception of our position possible 
to us. For only thus by means of their reciprocal influence can 
the parts of matter establish their simultaneous existence, and 
thereby, though only mediately, their coexistence, even to 
the most remote objects. Without community each percep- 
tion of an appearance in space is broken off from every other, A 21, 
and the chain of empirical representations, that is, experience, 

1 [Folge.} 
* [Reading, with Adickes, bewirke . . . beweise for bewirken . . . beweisen.} 



236 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

would have to begin entirely anew with each new object, 
B 261 without the least connection with the preceding representation, 
and without standing to it in any relation of time. I do not by 
this argument at all profess to disprove void space, for it may 
exist where perceptions cannot reach, and where there is, 
therefore, no empirical knowledge of coexistence. But such a 
space is not for us an object of any possible experience. 

The following remarks may be helpful in [further] elucida- 
tion [of my argument]. In our mind, all appearances, since 
they are contained in a possible experience, must stand in 
community (communio) of apperception, and in so far as the 
objects are to be represented as coexisting in connection with 
each other, they must mutually determine their position in 
one time, and thereby constitute a whole. If this subjective 
community is to rest on an objective ground, or is to hold of 
appearances as substances, the perception of the one must 
as ground make possible the perception of the other, and 
reversewise in order that the succession which is always 
found in the perceptions, as apprehensions, may not be as- 
cribed to the objects, and in order that, on the contrary, these 
objects may be represented as coexisting. But this is a re- 
ciprocal influence, that is, a real community (commerciuni) of 
A 215 substances; without it the empirical relation of coexistence 
could not be met with 1 in experience. Through this com- 
mercium the appearances, so far as they stand outside one 
B 262 another and yet in connection, constitute a composite (com- 
positum reale), and such composites are possible in many 
different ways. The three dynamical relations, from which 
all others spring, are therefore inherence, consequence, 2 and 
composition. 



These, then, are the three analogies of experience. They are 
simply principles of the determination of the existence of ap- 
pearances in time, according to all its three modes, viz. the rela- 
tion to time itself as a magnitude (the magnitude of existence, 
that is, duration), the relation in time as a successive series, and 
finally the relation in time as a sum of all simultaneous exist- 
ence. This unity of time-determination is altogether dynamical. 

1 [stattfinden.] a [/Consequent.] 



ANALOGIES OF EXPERIENCE 237 

For time is not viewed as that wherein experience immedi- 
ately determines position for every existence. Such deter- 
mination is impossible, inasmuch as absolute time is not an 
object of perception with which appearances could be con- 
fronted. What determines for each appearance its position in 
time is the rule of the understanding through which alone the 
existence of appearances can acquire synthetic unity as regards 
relations of time; and that rule consequently determines the 
position [in a manner that is] a priori and valid for each and 
every time. 

By nature, in the empirical sense, we understand the con- |g ^ 6 
nection of appearances as regards their existence according 
to necessary rules, that is, according to laws. There are certain 
laws which first make a nature possible, and these laws are 
a priori. Empirical laws can exist and be discovered only 
through experience, and indeed in consequence of those original 
laws through which experience itself first becomes possible. 
Our analogies therefore really portray the unity of nature in 
the connection of all appearances under certain exponents 1 
which express nothing save the relation of time (in so far as 
time comprehends all existence) to the unity of apperception 
such unity being possible only in synthesis according to 
rules. Taken together, the analogies thus declare that all 
appearances lie, and must lie, in one nature, because without 
this a priori unity no unity of experience, and therefore no 
determination of objects in it, would be possible. 

As to the mode of proof of which we have made use in 
these transcendental laws of nature, and as to their peculiar 
character, an observation has to be made which must likewise 
be of very great importance as supplying a rule to be followed 
in every other attempt to prove a priori propositions that are 
intellectual and at the same time synthetic. Had we attempted 
to prove these analogies dogmatically; had we, that is to say, 
attempted to show from concepts that everything which exists 
is to be met with only in that which is permanent, that every B 264 
event presupposes something in the preceding state upon A 217 
which it 2 follows in conformity with a rule; and finally, that 
in the manifold which is coexistent the states coexist in rela- 
tion to one another in conformity with a rule and so stand in 

1 [Exponenten.] * [Reading, with Hartenstein, sie for .] 



238 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

community, all our labour would have been wasted. For through 
mere concepts of these things, analyse them as we may, we can 
never advance from one object and its existence to the exist- 
ence of another or to its mode of existence. But there is an 
alternative method, namely, to investigate the possibility of 
experience as a knowledge wherein all objects if their repre- 
sentation is to have objective reality for us must finally be 
capable of being given to us. In this third [medium], 1 the 
essential form of which consists in the synthetic unity of the 
apperception of all appearances, we have found a priori con- 
ditions of complete and necessary determination of time for 
all existence in the [field of] appearance, without which even 
empirical determination of time would be impossible. In it we 
have also found rules of synthetic unity a priori ', by means of 
which we can anticipate experience. For lack of this method, 
and owing to the erroneous assumption that synthetic proposi- 
tions, which the empirical employment of the understanding 
recommends as being its principles, may be proved dogmatic- 
ally, the attempt has, time and again, been made, though 
B 265 always vainly, to obtain a proof of the principle of sufficient 
A 218 reason. 2 And since the guiding-thread of the categories, Which 
alone can reveal and make noticeable every gap in the under- 
standing, alike in regard to concepts and to principles, has 
hitherto been lacking, no one has so much as thought of the 
other two analogies, although use has always tacitly been 
made of them.* 

a The unity of the world-whole, in which all appearances have 
to be connected, is evidently a mere consequence of the tacitly 
assumed principle of the community of all substances which are 
coexistent. For if they were isolated, they would not as parts con- 
stitute a whole. And if their connection (the reciprocal action of the 
manifold) were not already necessary because of their coexistence, 
we could not argue from this latter, which is a merely ideal relation, 
to the former, which is a real relation. We have, however, in the 
proper context, shown that community is really the ground of the 
possibility of an empirical knowledge of coexistence, and that the 
inference, rightly regarded, is simply from this empirical knowledge 
to community as its condition. 

1 [In diesem Dritten.] 
* \des zurtichenden Grundes.} 



POSTULATES OF EMPIRICAL THOUGHT 239 



THE POSTULATES OF EMPIRICAL THOUGHT IN GENERAL 

1. That which agrees, in intuition and in concepts, with 
the formal conditions of experience, is possible. 

2. That which is bound up with the material conditions B 266 
of experience, that is, with sensation, is actual. 

3. That which in its connection with the actual is deter- 
mined in accordance with universal conditions of experience, 
is (that is, exists as) necessary. 

Explanation 

The categories of modality have the peculiarity that, in A 219 
determining an object, they do not in the least enlarge the 
concept to which they are attached as predicates. They only 
express the relation of the concept to the faculty of knowledge. 
Even when the concept of a thing is quite complete, I can still 
enquire whether this object is merely possible or is also actual, 
or if actual, whether it is not also necessary. No additional 
determinations are thereby thought in the object itself; the 
question is only how the object, together with all its deter- 
minations, is related to understanding and its empirical em- 
ployment, to empirical judgment, 1 and to reason in its appli- 
cation to experience. 

Just on this account also the principles of modality are 
nothing but explanations of the concepts of possibility, actual- 
ity, and necessity, in their empirical employment; at the same 
time they restrict all categories to their merely empirical em- 
ployment, and do not approve or allow their transcendental B 267 
employment. For if they are not to have a purely logical sig- 
nificance, analytically expressing the form of thought, but are 
to refer to the possibility, actuality, or necessity of things, they 
must concern possible experience and its synthetic unity, in 
which alone objects of knowledge can be given. 

The postulate of the possibility of things requires that A 220 
the concept of the things should agree with the formal con- 
ditions of an experience in general. But this, the objective 
form of experience in general, contains all synthesis that is 

1 [Urteilskraft.] 



240 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

required for knowledge of objects. A concept which contains 
a synthesis is to be regarded as empty and as not related to 
any object, if this synthesis does not belong to experience 
either as being derived from it, in which case it is an empirical 
concept^ or as being an a priori condition upon which experi- 
ence in general in its formal aspect rests, in which case it is 
&amp;pure concept. In the latter case it still belongs to experience, 
inasmuch as its object is to be met with only in experience. 
For whence shall we derive the character of the possibility of 
an object which is thought through a synthetic a priori con- 
cept, if not from the synthesis which constitutes the form of 

B 268 the empirical knowledge of objects? It is, indeed, a necessary 
logical condition that a concept of the possible must not con- 
tain any contradiction; but this is not by any means sufficient 
to determine the objective reality of the concept, that is, the pos- 
sibility of such an object as is thought through the concept. 
Thus there is no contradiction in the concept of a figure which 
is enclosed within two straight lines, since the concepts of two 
straight lines and of their coming together contain no negation 

A 221 of a figure. The impossibility arises not from the concept in 
itself, but in connection with its construction in space, ihat is, 
from the conditions of space and of its determination. But 
these have an objective reality of their own, that is, they apply 
to possible things, since they contain a priori in themselves 
the form of experience in general. 

We shall now proceed to show the far-reaching utility and 
influence of this postulate of possibility. If I represent to my- 
self a thing which is permanent, so that everything in it which 
, changes belongs only to its state, I can never know from such 
a concept that a thing of this kind is possible. Or if I represent 
to myself something which is so constituted that if it is posited 
something else invariably and inevitably follows from it, this 
may certainly be so thought without contradiction; but this 
thought affords no means of judging whether this property 
(causality) is to be met with in any possible thing. Lastly, 

B 269 I can represent to myself diverse things (substances), which 
are so constituted that the state of the one carries with it some 
consequence in the state of the other, and this reciprocally; 
but I can never determine from these concepts, which contain 
a merely arbitrary synthesis, whether a relation of this kind 



POSTULATES OF EMPIRICAL THOUGHT 241 

can belong to any [possible] things. Only through the fact that 
these concepts express a priori the relations of perceptions in 
every experience, do we know their objective reality, that is, A 222 
their transcendental truth, and this, indeed, independently of 
experience, though not independently of all relation to the 
form of an experience in general, and to the synthetic unity 
in which alone objects can be empirically known. 

But if we should seek to frame quite new concepts of sub- 
stances, forces, reciprocal actions, from the material which 
perception presents to us, without experience itself yielding 
the example of their connection, we should be occupying our- 
selves with mere fancies, of whose possibility there is absolutely 
no criterion since we have neither borrowed these concepts 
[directly] from experience, nor have taken experience as our 
instructress in their formation. Such fictitious concepts, un- 
like the categories, can acquire the character of possibility not 
in a priori fashion, as conditions upon which all experience 
depends, but only a posteriori as being concepts which are 
given through experience itself. And, consequently, their pos- 
sibility must either be known a posteriori and empirically, or B 270 
it cartnot be known at all. A substance which would be per- 
manently present in space, but without filling it (like that 
mode of existence intermediate between matter and thinking 
being which some would seek to introduce), or a special ulti- 
mate mental power of intuitively anticipating the future (and 
not merely inferring it), or lastly a power of standing in com- 
munity of thought with other men, however distant they may 
be are concepts the possibility of which is altogether ground- A 223 
less, as they cannot be based on experience and its known laws; 
and without such confirmation they are arbitrary combinations 
of thoughts, which, although indeed free from contradiction, 
can make no claim to objective reality, and none, therefore, as 
to the possibility of an object such as we here profess to think. 
As regards reality, we obviously cannot think it in concrete &gt; 
without calling experience to our aid. For reality is bound up 
with sensation, the matter of experience, not with that form 
of relation in regard to which we can, if we so choose, resort 
to a playful inventiveness. 1 

But I leave aside everything the possibility of which can 

1 [in Erdichtungen spielen.] 

R 



242 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

be derived only from its actuality in experience, and have here 
in view only the possibility of things through a priori concepts; 

B 271 and I maintain the thesis that their possibility can never be 
established from such concepts taken in and by themselves, 
but only when the concepts are viewed as formal and objective 
conditions of experience in general. 

It does, indeed, seem as if the possibility of a triangle could 
be known from its concept in and by itself (the concept is cer- 
tainly independent of experience), for we can, as a matter of 
fact, give it an object completely apriori&gt; that is, can construct 
it. But since this is only the form of an object, it would remain 

A 224 a mere product of imagination, and the possibility of its object 
would still be doubtful. To determine its possibility, something 
more is required, namely, that such a figure be thought under 
no conditions save those upon which all objects of experience 
rest. That space is a formal a priori condition of outer experi- 
ences, that the formative 1 synthesis through which we con- 
struct a triangle in imagination is precisely the same as that 
which we exercise in the apprehension of an appearance, in 
making for ourselves an empirical concept of it these are the 
considerations that alone enable us to connect the representa- 
tion of the possibility of such a thing with the concept of it. 
Similarly, since the concepts of continuous magnitudes, indeed 
of magnitudes in general, are one and all synthetic, the possi- 
bility of such magnitudes is never clear from the concepts them- 

B 272 selves, but only when they are viewed as formal conditions 
of the determination of objects in experience in general. And 
where, indeed, should we seek for objects corresponding to 
these concepts if not in experience, through which alone ob- 
jects are given to us? We can, indeed, prior to experience 
itself, know and characterise the possibility of things, merely 
by reference to the formal conditions under which in experi- 
ence anything whatsoever is determined as object, and 
therefore can do so completely a priori. But, even so, this is 
possible only in relation to experience and within its limits. 

A 225 The postulate bearing on the knowledge of things as 
actual does not, indeed, demand immediate perception (and, 
therefore, sensation of which we are conscious) of the object 
whose existence is to be known. What we do, however, 

1 [bildende.] 



POSTULATES OF EMPIRICAL THOUGHT 243 

require is an apprehension of the connection of the object 
with some actual perception, in accordance with the analogies 
of experience, which define 1 all real connection in an experi- 
ence in general. 2 

In the mere concept of a thing no mark 3 of its existence is 
to be found. For though it may be so complete that nothing 
which is required for thinking the thing with all its inner deter- 
minations is lacking to it, yet existence has nothing to do with 
all this, but only with the question whether such a thing be so 
given us that the perception of it can, if need be, precede the 
concept. For that the concept precedes the perception signi- B 273 
fies the concept's mere possibility; the perception which sup- 
plies the content to the concept is the sole mark of actuality. 
We can also, however, know the existence of the thing prior to 
its perception and, consequently, comparatively speaking, in 
an a priori manner, if only it be bound up with certain percep- 
tions, in accordance with the principles of their empirical con- 
nection (the analogies). For the existence of the thing being 
thus bound up with our perceptions in a possible experience, 
we are able in the series of possible perceptions and under the A 226 
guidahce of the analogies to make the transition from our 
actual perception to the thing in question. Thus from the per- 
ception of the attracted iron filings we know of the existence 
of a magnetic matter pervading all bodies, although the con- 
stitution of our organs cuts us off from all immediate percep- 
tion of this medium. 4 For in accordance with the laws of sensi- 
bility and the context of our perceptions, we should, were our 
senses more refined, come also in an experience 5 upon the im- 
mediate empirical intuition of it. The grossness of our senses 
does not in any way decide the form of possible experience in 
general. Our knowledge of the existence of things reaches, 
then, only so far as perception and its advance 6 according 
to empirical laws can extend. If we do not start from ex- 
perience, or do not proceed in accordance with laws of the em- B 274 

1 \darlegen^\ 

2 [In the opening sentence of this paragraph I adopt a change in the order 
of the words, as suggested by Valentiner.] 

8 [Charakter.] * [dieses Stoffs.} 

6 [If a comma be omitted from the text of A and B, we have what is perhaps 

the more natural reading: "the context of our perceptions in one experience, we 

should . . . come also upon . . ."] 

6 [Reading, with Wille, Fortgang for Anhang.} 



244 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

pirical connection of appearances, our guessing or enquiring 
into the existence of anything will only be an idle pretence. 
1 Idealism raises, however, what is a serious objection to these 
rules for proving existence mediately; and this is the proper 
place for its refutation. 



Refutation of Idealism 

Idealism meaning thereby material idealism is the 
theory which declares the existence of objects in space out- 
side us either to be merely doubtful and indemonstrable or to 
be false and impossible. The former is the problematic ideal- 
ism of Descartes, which holds that there is only one empirical 
assertion that is indubitably certain, namely, that 'I am'. The 
latter is the dogmatic idealism of Berkeley. He maintains that 
space, with all the things of which it is the inseparable condi- 
tion, is something which is in itself impossible; and he there- 
fore regards the things in space as merely imaginary entities. 2 
Dogmatic idealism is unavoidable, if space be interpreted as a 
property that must belong to things in themselves. For m that 
case space, and everything to which it serves as condition, is a 
non-entity. 8 The ground on which this idealism rests has al- 
ready been undermined by us in the Transcendental Aesthetic. 
Problematic idealism, which makes no such assertion, but 
B 275 merely pleads incapacity to prove, through immediate experi- 
ence, any existence except our own, is, in so far as it allows 
of no decisive judgment until sufficient proof has been found, 
reasonable and in accordance with a thorough and philo- 
sophical mode of thought. The required proof must, therefore, 
show that we have experience^ and not merely imagination of 
outer things; and this, it would seem, cannot be achieved save 
by proof that even our inner experience, which for Descartes 
is indubitable, is possible only on the assumption of outer ex- 
perience. 

1 [This sentence, and the immediately following Refutation of Idealism , added 
inB.] 

* [Einbildungcn.] 8 [Unding.] 



REFUTATION OF IDEALISM 245 



THESIS 

The mere } but empirically determined^ consciousness of my 
own existence proves the existence of objects in space 
outside me. 

Proof 

I am conscious of my own existence as determined in 
time. All determination of time presupposes something per- 
manent in perception. This permanent cannot, however, 
be something in me, since it is only through this per- 
manent that my existence in time can itself be deter- 
mined. 1 Thus perception of this permanent is possible only 
through a thing outside me and not through the mere re- 
presentation of a thing outside me; and consequently the 
determination of my existence in time is possible only through 
the existence of actual things which I perceive outside me. B 276 
Now consciousness [of my existence] in time is necessarily 
bound up with consciousness of the [condition of the] possi- 
bility t&gt;f this time-determination; and it is therefore necessarily 
bound up with the existence of things outside me, as the 
condition of the time-determination. In other words, the con- 
sciousness of my existence is at the same time an immediate 
consciousness of the existence of other things outside me. 

Note i. It will be observed that in the foregoing proof 
the game played by idealism has been turned against itself, 
and with greater justice. Idealism assumed that the only 
immediate experience is inner experience, and that from it 
we can only infer outer things and this, moreover, only in an 
untrustworthy manner, as in all cases where we are inferring 
from given effects to determinate causes. In this particular case, 
the cause of the representations, which we ascribe, perhaps 
falsely, to outer things, may lie in ourselves. But in the above 
proof it has been shown that outer experience is really 

1 [As stated by Kant in the Preface to B (above, p. 36 .), this sentence should 
be altered as follows: "But this permanent cannot be an intuition in me. For all 
grounds of determination of my existence which are to be met with in me are re- 
presentations; and as representations themselves require a permanent distinct 
from them, in relation to which their change, and so my existence in the time 
wherein they change, may be determined."} 



246 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

B 277 immediate, a and that only by means of it is inner experience 
not indeed the consciousness of my own existence, but the 
determination of it in time possible. Certainly, the repre- 
sentation 'I am', which expresses the consciousness that can 
accompany all thought, immediately includes in itself the 
existence of a subject; but it does not so include any knowledge 
of that subject, and therefore also no empirical knowledge, 
that is, no experience of it. For this we require, in addition to 
the thought of something existing, also intuition, and in this 
case inner intuition, in respect of which, that is, of time, the 
subject must be determined. But in order so to determine it, 
outer objects are quite indispensable; and it therefore follows 
that inner experience is itself possible only mediately, and 
only through outer experience. 

Note 2. With this thesis all employment of our cognitive 
faculty in experience, in the determination of time, entirely 
agrees. Not only are we unable to perceive 1 any deter- 
mination of time save through change in outer relations 
(motion) relatively to the permanent in space (for instance, 
the motion of the sun relatively to objects on the earth), we 

B 278 have nothing permanent on which, as intuition, we can base 
the concept of a substance, save only matter] and even this 
permanence is not obtained from outer experience, but is 
presupposed a priori as a necessary condition of determina- 
tion of time, and therefore also as a determination of inner 
sense in respect of [the determination of] our own existence 
through the existence of outer things. The consciousness of 
myself in the representation T is not an intuition, but a 

The immediate consciousness of the existence of outer things 
is, in the preceding thesis, not presupposed, but proved, be the 
possibility of this consciousness understood by us or not. The ques- 
tion as to its possibility would be this: whether we have an inner 
sense only, and no outer sense, but merely an outer imagination. It 
is clear, however, that in order even only to imagine something as 
B 277 outer, that is, to present it to sense in intuition, we must already 
have an outer sense, and must thereby immediately distinguish the 
mere receptivity of an outer intuition from the spontaneity which 
characterises every act of imagination. For should we merely be 
imagining an outer sense, the faculty of intuition, which is to be 
determined by the faculty of imagination, would itself be annulled. 

1 [Reading, with Grille, wahrnehmen for vorneAmen.] 



REFUTATION OF IDEALISM 247 

merely intellectual representation of the spontaneity x of a 
thinking subject. This T has not, therefore, the least pre- 
dicate of intuition, which, as permanent, might serve as cor- 
relate for the determination of time in inner sense in the 
manner in which, for instance, impenetrability serves in our 
empirical intuition of matter. 

Note 3. From the fact that the existence of outer things 
is required for the possibility of a determinate consciousness 
of the self, it does not follow that every intuitive representa- 
tion of outer things involves the existence of these things, 
for their representation can very well be the product merely 
of the imagination (as in dreams and delusions). Such re- 
presentation is merely the reproduction of previous outer 
perceptions, which, as has been shown, are possible only 
through the reality of outer objects. All that we have here 
sought to prove is that inner experience in general is possible 
only through outer experience in general. Whether this or that B 279 
supposed experience be not purely imaginary, must be ascer- 
tained from its special determinations, and through its con- 
gruence with the criteria of all real experience. 2 



Lastly, as regards the third postulate, it concerns material 
necessity in existence, and not merely formal and logical 
necessity in the connection of concepts. Since the existence of 
any object of the senses cannot be known completely a priori, 
but only comparatively a priori^ relatively to some other pre- 
viously given existence; and since, even so, we 8 can then A 227 
arrive only at such an existence as must somewhere be 
contained in the context 4 of the experience, of which the 
given perception is a part, the necessity of existence can 
never be known from concepts, but always only from con- 
nection with that which is perceived, in accordance with 
universal laws of experience. Now there is no existence that 
can be known as necessary under the condition of other given 
appearances, save the existence of effects from given causes, 

1 [Selbsttdtigkeit.] a [This concludes passage added in B.] 

8 [Reading, with Mellin, man gleichwohl for gleichwohl^ 
4 [Zusammenhange.] 



248 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

in accordance with laws of causality. It is not, therefore, the 
existence of things (substances) that we can know to be neces- 
sary, but only the existence of their state; and this necessity 

B 280 of the existence of their state we can know only from other 
states, which are given in perception, in accordance with 
empirical laws of causality. It therefore follows that the cri- 
terion of necessity lies solely in the law of possible experience, 
the law that everything which happens is determined a priori 
through its cause in the [field of] appearance. We thus know 
the necessity only of those effects in nature the causes of which 
are given to us, and the character 1 of necessity in existence 
extends no further than the field of possible experience, and 
even in this field is not applicable to the existence of things as 
substances, since substances can never be viewed as empirical 
effects that is, as happening and coming to be. Necessity con- 

A 228 cerns only the relations of appearances in conformity with the 
dynamical law of causality and the possibility grounded upon 
it of inferring a priori from a given existence (a cause) to 
another existence (the effect). That everything which happens 
is hypothetically necessary is a principle which subordinates 
alteration in the world to a law, that is, to a rule of necessary 
existence, without which there would be nothing that could be 
entitled nature. The proposition that nothing happens through 
blind chance (in mundo non datur casus) is therefore an a 
priori law of nature. So also is the proposition that no neces- 
sity in nature is blind, but always a conditioned and therefore 
intelligible necessity (non datur fatum). Both are laws through 

B 281 which the play of alterations is rendered subject to a nature of 
things (that is, of things as appearances), or what amounts to 
the same thing, to the unity of understanding, in which 2 
alone they can belong to one experience, that is, to the syn- 
thetic unity of appearances. Both belong to the class of 
dynamical principles. The first is really a consequence of the 
principle of causality, and so belongs to the analogies of 
experience. The second is a principle of modality; but this 
modality, while adding the concept of necessity to causal 
determination, itself stands under a rule of understanding. 
The principle of continuity forbids any leap in the series of 
appearances, that is, of alterations (in mundo non datur saltus]\ 
1 [Merkmal.] a [Reading, with Erdmann, welcher for welchem.} 



POSTULATES OF EMPIRICAL THOUGHT 249 

it also forbids, in respect of the sum of all empirical intuitions A 229 
in space, any gaps or cleft between two appearances (non 
datur hiatus); for so we may express the proposition, that 
nothing which proves a vacuum, or which even admits it as a 
part of empirical synthesis, can enter into experience. As regards 
a void which may be conceived to lie beyond the field of possible 
experience, that is, outside the world, such a question does not 
come within the jurisdiction of the mere understanding which 
decides only upon questions that concern the use to be made 
of given appearances for the obtaining of empirical know- 
ledge. It is a problem for that ideal reason l which goes out 
beyond the sphere of a possible experience and seeks to judge B 282 
of that which surrounds and limits it; and is a problem which 
will therefore have to be considered in the Transcendental 
Dialectic. These four propositions (in mundo non datur 
hiatus &gt; non datur saltus, non datur casus, non datur fatuni), 
like all principles of transcendental origin, we can easily ex- 
hibit in their order, that is, in accordance with the order of 
the categories, and so assign to each its proper place. But the 
reader has now had sufficient practice to allow of his doing 
this for himself, or of easily discovering the guiding principle 
for so doing. They are all entirely at one in this, that they 
allow of nothing in the empirical synthesis which may do 
violence or detriment to the understanding and to the con- 
tinuous connection of all appearances that is, to the unity of A 230 
the concepts of the understanding. For in the understanding 
alone is possible the unity of experience, in which all percep- 
tions must have their place. 

To enquire whether the field of possibility is larger than the 
field which contains all actuality, and this latter, again, larger 
than the sum of that which is necessary, is to raise somewhat 
subtle questions which demand a synthetic solution and yet 
come under the jurisdiction of reason alone. For they are 
tantamount to the enquiry whether things as appearances one 
and all belong to the sum and context 2 of a single experience, 
of which every given perception is a part, a part which there- 
fore cannot be connected with any other [series of] appearances, 
or whether my perceptions can belong, in their general con- B 283 
nection, to more than one possible experience. The under- 

1 [fur die idealische Vernunft.] * [Konttxt.] 



250 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

standing, in accordance with the subjective and formal con- 
ditions of sensibility as well as of apperception, prescribes 
a priori to experience in general the rules which alone make 
experience possible. Other forms of intuition than space and 
time, other forms of understanding than the discursive forms 
of thought, or of knowledge through concepts, even if they 
should be possible, we cannot render in any way conceivable 
and comprehensible to ourselves; and even assuming that we 
could do so, they still would not belong to experience the 
only kind of knowledge in which objects are given to us. 

A 231 Whether other perceptions than those belonging to our whole 
possible experience, and therefore a quite different field of 
matter, may exist, the understanding is not in a position to 
decide. It can deal only with the synthesis of that which is 
given. Moreover, the poverty of the customary inferences 
through which we throw open a great realm of possibility, of 
which all that is actual (the objects of experience) is only a small 
part, is patently obvious. Everything actual is possible; from 
this proposition there naturally follows, in accordance with the 
logical rules of conversion, the merely particular proposition, 

B 284 that some possible is actual; and this would seem to mean 
that much is possible which is not actual. It does indeed 
seem as if we were justified in extending the number of 
possible things beyond that of the actual, on the ground 
that something must be added to the possible to constitute 
the actual. 1 But this [alleged] process of adding to the pos- 
sible I refuse to allow. For that which would have to be 
added to the possible, over and above the possible, would 
be impossible What can be added is only a relation to my 
understanding, namely, that in addition to agreement with 
the formal conditions of experience there should be connec- 
tion with some perception. But whatever is connected with 
perception in accordance with empirical laws is actual, even 
although it is not immediately perceived. That yet another 
series of appearances in thoroughgoing connection with that 
which is given in perception, and consequently that more 

A 232 than one all-embracing experience is possible, cannot be in- 
ferred from what is given; and still less can any such infer- 
ence be drawn independently of anything being given since 

1 [Reading, with Vaihinger, jenem . . . dieses forjensr . . . dtese.} 



POSTULATES OF EMPIRICAL THOUGHT 251 

without material l nothing whatsoever can be thought. What 
is possible only under conditions which themselves are merely 
possible is not in all respects possible. But such [absolute] 
possibility is in question when it is asked whether the possi- 
bility of things extends further than experience can reach. 

I have made mention of these questions only in order to 
omit nothing which is ordinarily reckoned among the concepts B 285 
of understanding. But as a matter of fact absolute possibility, 
that which is in all respects valid, is no mere concept of 
understanding, and can never be employed empirically. It 
belongs exclusively to reason, which transcends all possible 
empirical employment of the understanding. We have there- 
fore had to content ourselves with some merely critical re- 
marks; the matter must otherwise be left in obscurity until we 
come to the proper occasion for its further treatment. 

Before concluding this fourth section, and therewith the 
system of all principles of pure understanding, I must explain 
why I have entitled the principles of modality postulates. I 
interpret this expression not in the sense which some recent 
philosophical writers, wresting it from its proper mathematical A 233 
significance, have given to it, namely, that to postulate should 
mean to treat a proposition as immediately certain, with- 
out justification or proof. For if, in dealing with synthetic 
propositions, we are to recognise them as possessing un- 
conditioned validity, independently of deduction, on the evi- 
dence [merely] of their own claims, then no matter how evident 
they may be, all critique of understanding is given up. And 
since there is no lack of audacious pretensions, and these are 
supported by common belief (though that is no credential of 
their truth), the understanding lies open to every fancy, and is B 286 
in no position to withhold approval of those assertions which, 
though illegitimate, yet press upon us, in the same confident 
tone, their claims to be accepted as actual axioms. Whenever, 
therefore, an a priori determination is synthetically added to 
the concept of a thing, it is indispensable that, if not a proof, 
at least a deduction of the legitimacy of such an assertion 
should be supplied. 

The principles of modality are not, however, objectively 
synthetic. For the predicates of possibility, actuality, and 

1 [Staff.} 



252 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

necessity do not in the least enlarge the concept of which they 
are affirmed, adding something to the representation of the 
object. But since they are none the less synthetic, they are so 

A 234 subjectively only, that is, they add to the concept of a thing (of 
something real), 1 of which otherwise they say nothing, the cog- 
nitive faculty from which it springs and in which it has its seat. 
Thus if it is in connection only with the formal conditions of 
experience, and so merely in the understanding, its object is 
called possible. If it stands in connection with perception, that is, 
with sensation as material 2 supplied by the senses, and through 
perception is determined by means of the understanding, the 
object is actual. If itis determined through the connection of per- 

B 287 ceptions according to concepts, the object is entitled necessary. 
The principles of modality thus predicate of a concept nothing 
but the action of the faculty of knowledge through which it 
is generated. Now in mathematics a postulate means the prac- 
tical proposition which contains nothing save the synthesis 
through which we first give ourselves an object and generate 
its concept for instance, with a given line, to describe a circle 
on a plane from a given point. Such a proposition cannot be 
proved, since the procedure which it demands is exactly that 
through which we first generate the concept of such a figure. 
With exactly the same right we may postulate the principles of 
modality, since they do not increase our 3 concept of things," 

A 235 but only show the manner in which it is connected with the 
faculty of knowledge. 

B 288 General Note on the System of the Principles* 

That the possibility of a thing cannot be determined from 
the category alone, and that in order to exhibit the objective 
reality of the pure concept of understanding we must always 

Through the actuality of a thing I certainly posit more than 
the possibility of it, but not in the thing. For it can never contain 
more in its actuality than is contained in its complete possibility. 
But while possibility is merely a positing of the thing in relation to 
the understanding (in its empirical employment), actuality is at the 
same time a connection of it with perception. 

1 [In A (reaten), in B (Realen)^ * [Materie.] 

* [Reading, with Erdmann, unsern for ihren.] 
4 [This section, to end of chapter, added in B.] 



POSTULATES OF EMPIRICAL THOUGHT 253 

have an intuition, is a very noteworthy fact. Take, for instance, 
the categories of relation. We cannot determine from mere 
concepts how (i) something can exist as subject only, and not 
as a mere determination of other things, that is, how a thing 
can be substance, or (2) how, because something is, something 
else must be, and how, therefore, a thing can be a cause, or (3) 
when several things exist, how because one of them is there, 
something follows in regard to the others and vice versa, and 
how in this way there can be a community of substances. 
This likewise applies to the other categories; for example, 
how a thing can be equal to a number of things taken together, 
that is, can be a quantity. So long as intuition is lacking, we do 
not know whether through the categories we are thinking an 
object, and whether indeed there can anywhere be an object 
suited to them. In all these ways, then, we obtain confirmation 
that the categories are not in themselves knowledge, but are 
merely forms of thought for the making of knowledge from 
given intuitions. 

For the same reason it follows that no synthetic proposi- B 289 
tion can be made from mere categories. For instance, we are 
not m a position to say that in all existence there is substance, 
that is, something which can exist only as subject and not as 
mere predicate; or that everything is a quantum, etc. For if 
intuition be lacking, there is nothing which can enable us to 
go out beyond a given concept, and to connect another with it. 
No one, therefore, has ever yet succeeded in proving a syn- 
thetic proposition merely from pure concepts of the under- 
standing as, for instance, that everything which exists con- 
tingently has a cause. We can never get further than proving, 
that without this relation we are unable to comprehend the 
existence of the contingent, that is, are unable a priori through 
the understanding to know the existence of such a thing 
from which it does not, however, follow that this is also a con- 
dition of the possibility of the things themselves. If the reader 
will go back to our proof of the principle of causality that 
everything which happens, that is, every event, presupposes a 
cause he will observe that we were able to prove it only of 
objects of possible experience; and even so, not from pure con- 
cepts, but only as a principle of the possibility of experience, 
and therefore of the knowledge of an object given in empirical 



254 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

intuition. We cannot, indeed, deny that the proposition, that 
B 290 everything contingent must have a cause, is patent to every- 
one from mere concepts. But the concept of the contingent 
is then being apprehended as containing, not the category 
of modality (as something the not-being of which can be 
thought}, but that of relation (as something which can exist 
only as consequence 1 of something else); and it is then, of 
course, an identical proposition that which can exist only 
as consequence has a cause. As a matter of fact, when we are 
required to cite examples of contingent existence, we invari- 
ably have recourse to alterations, and not merely to the possi- 
bility of entertaining the opposite in thought! 1 Now alteration 
B 291 is an event which, as such, is possible only through a cause, and 
the not-being of which is therefore in itself possible. In other 
words, we recognise contingency in and through the fact that 
something can exist only as the effect of a cause; and if, there- 
fore, a thing is assumed to be contingent, it is an analytic pro- 
position to say that it has a cause. 

But it is an even more noteworthy fact, that in order to 
understand the possibility of things in conformity with the 
categories, and so to demonstrate the objective reality or the 
latter, we need, not merely intuitions, but intuitions that are in 
all cases outer intuitions. When, for instance, we take the pure 
concepts of relation, we find, firstly, that in order to obtain 
something permanent in intuition corresponding to the con- 
cept of substance, and so to demonstrate the objective reality 
of this concept, we require an intuition in space (of matter). 

We can easily think the non-existence of matter. From this 
the ancients did not, however, infer its contingency. Even the 
change from being to not-being of a given state of a thing, in which 
all alteration consists, does not prove the contingency of this 
state, on the ground of the reality of its opposite. For instance, that 
a body should come to rest after having been in motion does not 
prove the contingency of the motion as being the opposite of the 
state of rest. For this opposite is opposed to the other only logically, 
not realiter. To prove the contingency of its motion, we should have 
to prove that instead of the motion at the preceding moment, it was 
possible for the body to have been then at rest, not that it is after- 
wards at rest; for in the latter case the opposites are quite consistent 
with each other. 



POSTULATES OF EMPIRICAL THOUGHT 255 

For space alone is determined as permanent, while time, and 
therefore everything that is in inner sense, is in constant flux. 
Secondly, in order to exhibit alteration as the intuition corre- 
sponding to the concept of causality , we must take as our 
example motion, that is, alteration in space. Only in this way 
can we obtain the intuition of alterations, the possibility of 
which can never be comprehended through any pure under- 
standing. For alteration is combination of contradictorily 
opposed determinations in the existence of one and the same 
thing. Now how it is 1 possible that from a given state of a thing B 292 
an opposite state should follow, not only cannot be conceived 
by reason without an example, but is actually incomprehensible 
to reason without intuition. The intuition required is the in- 
tuition of the movement of a point in space. The presence of 
the point in different locations (as a sequence of opposite de- 
terminations) is what alone first yields to us an intuition of 
alteration. For in order that we may afterwards make inner 
alterations likewise thinkable, we must represent time (the 
form of inner sense) figuratively as a line, and the inner 
alteration through the drawing of this line (motion), and so 
in this manner by means of outer intuition make compre- 
hensible the successive existence of ourselves in different 
states. The reason of this is that all alteration, if it is to be 
perceived as alteration, presupposes something permanent in 
intuition, and that in inner sense no permanent intuition is 
to be met with. Lastly, the possibility of the category of 
community cannot be comprehended through mere reason 
alone; and consequently its objective reality is only to be de- 
termined through intuition, and indeed through outer intuition 
in space. For how are we to think it to be possible, when several 
substances exist, that, from the existence of one, something (as 
effect) can follow in regard to the existence of the others, and 
vice versa] in other words, that because there is something 
in the one there must also in the others be something which B 293 
is not to be understood solely from the existence of these 
others? For this is what is required in order that there be com- 
munity; community is not conceivable as holding between 
things each of which, through its subsistence, 2 stands in com- 
plete isolation. Leibniz, in attributing to the substances of the 

1 [Reading, with Vorlander, ist for set.] * [Subsistenz.] 



256 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

world, as thought through the understanding alone, a com- 
munity, had therefore to resort to the mediating intervention 
of a Deity. For, as he justly recognised, a community of sub- 
stances is utterly inconceivable as arising simply from their 
existence. We can, however, render the possibility of com- 
munity of substances as appearances perfectly compre- 
hensible, if we represent them to ourselves in space, that is, 
in outer intuition. For this already contains in itself a priori 
formal outer relations as conditions of the possibility of the 
real relations of action and reaction, and therefore of the 
possibility of community. 

Similarly, it can easily be shown that the possibility of 
things as quantities t and therefore the objective reality of 
quantity, can be exhibited only in outer intuition, and that 
only through the mediation of outer intuition can it be applied 
also to inner sense. But, to avoid prolixity, I must leave the 
reader to supply his own examples of this. 

These remarks are of great importance, not only in con- 
firmation of our previous refutation of idealism, but even 
more, when we come to treat of self-knowledge by mere inner 
B 294 consciousness, that is, by determination of our nature without 
the aid of outer empirical intuitions as showing us the limits 
of the possibility of this kind of knowledge. 

The final outcome of this whole section is therefore this: 
all principles of the pure understanding are nothing more than 
principles a priori of the possibility of experience, and to 
experience alone do all a priori synthetic propositions relate 
indeed, their possibility itself rests entirely on this relation. 



TRANSCENDENTAL DOCTRINE OF JUDGMENT 
(ANALYTIC OF PRINCIPLES) 

CHAPTER III 

THE GROUND OF THE DISTINCTION OF ALL OBJECTS 
IN GENERAL INTO PHENOMENA AND NOUMENA 

WE have now not merely explored the territory of pure under- 
standing, and carefully surveyed every part of it, but have 
also measured its extent, and assigned to everything in it its 
rightful place. This domain is an island, enclosed by nature 
itself within unalterable limits. It is the land of truth en- 
chanting name! surrounded by a wide and stormy ocean, B 295 
the native home of illusion, where many a fog bank and many 
a swiftly melting iceberg give the deceptive appearance of 
farther shores, deluding the adventurous seafarer ever anew A 236 
with empty hopes, and engaging him in enterprises which 
he can never abandon and yet is unable to carry to com- 
pletion. Before we venture on this sea, to explore it in 
all directions and to obtain assurance whether there be any 
ground for such hopes, it will be well to begin by casting 
a glance upon the map of the land which we are about 
to leave, and to enquire, first, whether we cannot in any 
case be satisfied with what it contains are not, indeed, 
under compulsion to be satisfied, inasmuch as there may be 
no other territory upon which we can settle; and, secondly, 
by what title we possess even this domain, and can consider 
ourselves as secured against all opposing claims. Although 
we have already given a sufficient answer to these questions 
in the course of the Analytic, a summary statement of its 
solutions may nevertheless help to strengthen our conviction, 
by focussing the various considerations in their bearing on 
the questions now before us. 

257 S 



258 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

We have seen that everything which the understanding 
derives from itself is, though not borrowed from experience, 
at the disposal of the understanding solely for use in experi- 

B 296 ence. The principles of pure understanding, whether con- 
stitutive a priori^ like the mathematical principles, or merely 
regulative, like the dynamical, contain nothing but what 

A 237 may be called the pure schema of possible experience. For 
experience obtains its unity only from the synthetic unity 
which the understanding originally and of itself confers 
upon the synthesis of imagination in its relation to apper- 
ception; and the appearances, as data for a possible know- 
ledge, must already stand a priori in relation to, and in agree- 
ment with, that synthetic unity. But although these rules of 
understanding are not only true a priori, but are indeed 
the source of all truth (that is, of the agreement of our know- 
ledge with objects), inasmuch as they contain in themselves 
the ground of the possibility of experience viewed as the sum 
of all knowledge wherein objects can be given to us, we are 
not satisfied with the exposition merely of that which is true, 
but likewise demand that account be taken of that which we 
desire to know. If, therefore, from this critical enquify we 
learn nothing more than what, in the merely empirical em- 
ployment of understanding, we should in any case have 
practised without any such subtle enquiry, it would seem 
as if the advantage derived from it by no means repays 
the labour expended. The reply may certainly be made that 
in the endeavour to extend our knowledge a meddlesome 
curiosity is far less injurious than the habit of always insisting, 

B 2 97 before entering on any enquiries, upon antecedent proof of 
the utility of the enquiries an absurd demand, since prior 
to completion of the enquiries we are not in a position to form 
the least conception of this utility, even if it were placed before 
our eyes. There is, however, one advantage which may be 
made comprehensible and of interest even to the most re- 

A 2 3 8 fractory and reluctant learner, the advantage, that while the 
understanding, occupied merely with its empirical employ- 
ment, and not reflecting upon the sources of its own know- 
ledge, may indeed get along quite satisfactorily, there is yet 
one task to which it is not equal, that, namely, of determining 
the limits of its employment, and of knowing what it is that 



PHENOMENA AND NOUMENA 259 

may lie within and what it is that lies without its own proper 
sphere. This demands just those deep enquiries which we have 
instituted. If the understanding in its empirical employment 
cannot distinguish whether certain questions lie within its 
horizon or not, it can never be assured of its claims or of its 
possessions, but must be prepared for many a humiliating 
disillusionment, whenever, as must unavoidably and con- 
stantly happen, it oversteps the limits of its own domain, 
and loses itself in opinions that are baseless and mis- 
leading. 

If the assertion, that the understanding can employ its 
various principles and its various concepts solely in an em- 
pirical and never in a transcendental manner, is a proposition 
which can be known with certainty, it will yield important B 298 
consequences. The transcendental employment of a concept 
in any principle is its application to things in general and in 
themselves\ the empirical employment is its application merely 
to appearances\ that is, to objects of a possible experience. That A 239 
the latter application of concepts is alone feasible is evident 
from the following considerations. We demand in every con- 
cept, first, the logical form of a concept (of thought) in general, 
and secondly, the possibility of giving it an object to which 
it may be applied. In the absence of such object, it has no 
meaning and is completely lacking in content, though it may 
still contain the logical function which is required for making 
a concept out of any data that may be presented. Now the 
object cannot be given to a concept otherwise than in intui- 
tion; for though a pure intuition can indeed precede the object 
a priori, even this intuition can acquire its object, and there- 
fore objective validity, only through the empirical intuition 
of which it is the mere form. Therefore all concepts, and 
with them all principles, even such as are possible a priori, 
relate to empirical intuitions, that is, to the data for a 
possible experience. Apart from this relation they have no 
objective validity, and in respect of their representations are 
a mere play of imagination or of understanding. Take, for 
instance, the concepts of mathematics, considering them first B 299 
of all in their pure intuitions. Space has three dimensions; 
between two points there can be only one straight line, etc. 
Although all these principles, and the representation of the 



26o KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

object with which this science occupies itself, are generated 
A 240 in the mind completely a priori, they would mean nothing, 
were we not always able to present their meaning in appear- 
ances, that is, in empirical objects. We therefore demand 
that a bare * concept be made sensible, that is, that an object 
corresponding to it be presented in intuition. Otherwise the 
concept would, as we say, be without sense, that is, without 
meaning. The mathematician meets this demand by the con- 
struction of a figure, which, although produced a priori, is an 
appearance present to the senses. In the same science the 
concept of magnitude seeks its support and sensible meaning 2 
in number, and this in turn in the fingers, in the beads of the 
abacus, or in strokes and points which can be placed before 
the eyes. The concept itself is always a priori in origin, and 
so likewise are the synthetic principles or formulas derived 
from such concepts; but their employment and their relation 
to their professed objects can in the end be sought nowhere 
but in experience, of whose possibility they contain the formal 
conditions. 

B 300 That this is also the case with all categories and the prin- 
ciples derived from them, appears from the following con- 
sideration. We cannot define any one of them in any real 3 
fashion, that is, make the possibility of their object under- 
standable, 4 without at once descending to the conditions of 
sensibility, and so to the form of appearances to which, as 
A 241 their sole objects, they must consequently be limited. For if 
this condition be removed, all meaning, that is, relation to the 
object, falls away; and we cannot through any example make 
comprehensible to ourselves what sort of a thing is to be meant 
by such a concept.* 

* [In A follows the passage, omitted in B:] 

In the above statement of the table of categories, we relieved 
ourselves of the task of defining each of them, as our purpose, 
which concerned only their synthetic employment, did not 
require such definition, and we are not called upon to incur 
any responsibility through unnecessary undertakings from 

1 \abgesonderten, i.e. apart from all elements of sense.] 
* [Sinn.] [real added in B.] 

4 ["that is, make . . . understandable" added in B.] 



PHENOMENA AND NOUMENA 261 

The concept of magnitude in general can never be explained 
except by saying that it is that determination of a thing 
whereby we are enabled to think how many times unity is posited 
in it. But this how-many-times is based on successive repetition, 
and therefore on time and the synthesis of the homogeneous 
in time. Reality, in contradistinction to negation, can be ex- 
plained only if we think time (as containing 1 all being) as either 
filled with being or as empty. If I leave out permanence (which 
is existence in all time), nothing remains in the concept of sub- 
stance save only the logical representation of a subject a re- 
presentation which I endeavour to realise 2 by representing to 
myself something which can exist only as subject and never as | B *** 

which we can be relieved. It was no evasion but an important 
prudential maxim, not to embark upon the task of definition, 
attempting or professing to attain completeness and precision 
in the determination of a concept, so long as we can achieve our 
end with one or other of its properties, without requiring a 
complete enumeration of all those that constitute the com- 
plete Concept. But we now perceive that the ground of this 
precaution lies still deeper. We realise that we are unable to 
define them even if we wished." For if we remove all those 
conditions of sensibility which mark them out as concepts of A 242 
possible empirical employment, and view them as concepts of 
things in general and therefore of transcendental employment, 
all that we can then do with them is to regard the logical 
function in judgments [to which they give expression] as the 
condition of the possibility of the things themselves, without 
in the least being able to show how they can have application 
to an object, that is, how in pure understanding, apart from 
sensibility, they can have meaning and objective validity. 

a I here mean real definition which does not merely substitute 
for the name of a thing other more intelligible words, but contains 
a clear property by which the defined object can always be known 
with certainty, and which makes the explained concept serviceable 
in application. Real explanation would be that which makes clear A 242 
not only the concept but also its objective reality. Mathematical 
explanations which present the object in intuition, in conformity 
with the concept, are of this latter kind. 

1 \ah den Inbegriff von.] * [reahsieren.] 



262 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

predicate. But not only am I ignorant of any conditions under 
which this logical pre-eminence may belong to anything; I can 
neither put such a concept to any use, nor draw the least infer- 
ence from it. For under these conditions no object is deter- 
mined for its employment, and consequently we do not know 
whether it signifies anything whatsoever If I omit from the 
concept of cause the time in which something follows upon 
something else in conformity with a rule, I should find in the 
pure category nothing further than that it is something from 
which we can conclude to the existence of something else. In 
that case not only would we be unable to distinguish cause and 
effect from one another, but since the power to draw such in- 
ferences requires conditions of which I know nothing, the con- 
cept would yield no indication how it applies to any object. 
The so-called principle, that everything accidental has a cause, 
presents itself indeed somewhat pompously, as self-sufficing 
in its own high dignity. But if I ask what is understood by 
accidental, and you reply, "That the not-being of which is 
possible," I would gladly know how you can determine this 
possibility of its not-being, if you do not represent a succession 
in the series of appearances and in it a being which follows 
upon not-being (or reversewise), that is, a change. For to say 
A 244 that the not-being of a thing does not contradict itself, is a lame 
B 302 appeal to a logical condition, which, though necessary to the 
concept, is very far from being sufficient for real possibility. 
I can remove in thought every existing substance without 
contradicting myself, but I cannot infer from this their objec- 
tive contingency in existence, that is, that their 1 non-existence 
is possible. As regards the concept of community, it is easily 
seen that inasmuch as the pure categories of substance 
and causality admit of no explanation determinant of the 
object, neither is any such explanation possible of reciprocal 
causality in the relation of substances to one another (com- 
mercium). So long as the definition of possibility, existence, 
and necessity is sought solely in pure understanding, they can- 
not be explained save through an obvious tautology. For to 
substitute the logical possibility of the concept (namely, that 
the concept does not contradict itself) for the transcendental 
possibility of things (namely, that an object corresponds to 

1 [Reading, with Vaihinger, ihres for seines.] 



PHENOMENA AND NOUMENA 263 

the concept) can deceive and leave satisfied only the simple- 
minded.* 01 



* [In A follows the passage, omitted in B:] 

There is something strange and even absurd in the asser- 
tion that there should be a concept which possesses a meaning 
and yet is not capable of any explanation. But the categories 
have this peculiar feature, that only in virtue of the general 
condition of sensibility can they possess a determinate mean- 
ing and relation to any object. Now when this condition has A 245 
been omitted from the pure category, it can contain nothing but 
the logical function for bringing the manifold under a concept. 
By means of this function or form of the concept, thus taken 
by itself, we cannot in any way know and distinguish what 
object comes under it, since we have abstracted from the sens- 
ible condition through which alone objects can come under it. 
Consequently, the categories require, in addition to the pure 
concept of understanding, determinations of their application to 
sensibility in general (schemata 1 ). Apart from such application 
they are not concepts through which an object is known and 
distinguished from others, but only so many modes of think- 
ing an object for possible intuitions, and of giving it meaning, 
under the requisite further conditions, in conformity with some 
function of the understanding, that is, of defining it. But they 
cannot themselves be defined. The logical functions of judg- 
ments in general, unity and plurality, assertion and denial, 
subject and predicate, cannot be defined without perpetrat- 
ing a circle, since the definition must itself be a judgment, and 
so must already contain these functions. The pure categories 
are nothing but representations of things in general, so far as 
the manifold of their intuition must be thought through one or 
other of these logical functions. Magnitude is the determina- 

a In a word, if all sensible intuition, the only kind of intuition 
which we possess, is removed, not one of these concepts can in any 
fashion verify itself, so as to show its real possibility. Only logical 
possibility then remains, that is, that the concept or thought is pos- B 303 
sible. That, however, is not what we are discussing, but whether 
the concept relates to an object and so signifies something. 2 

1 [Reading, with Valentiner, schemata for schema^ 

* [Note added in B, presumably as a substitute for the passage omitted.] 



264 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

B 303 From all this it undeniably follows that the pure concepts of 
understanding can never admit of transcendental^- but always 
only of empirical employment, and that the principles of pure 
understanding can apply only to objects of the senses under 
the universal conditions of a possible experience, never to 
things in general without regard to the mode in which we are 
able to intuit them. 

Accordingly the Transcendental Analytic leads to this 
important conclusion, that the most the understanding can 
achieve a priori is to anticipate the form of a possible experi- 
ence in general. And since that which is not appearance can- 
not be an object of experience, the understanding can never 
transcend those limits of sensibility within which alone objects 

A 247 can be given to us. Its principles are merely rules for the ex- 
position of appearances; and the proud name of an Ontology 
that presumptuously claims to supply, in systematic doctrinal 
form, synthetic a priori knowledge of things in general (for 
instance, the principle of causality) must, therefore, give place 
to the modest title of a mere Analytic of pure understanding. 

B 304 Thought is the act which relates given intuition to an 
object. If the mode 2 of this intuition is not in any way 
given, the object is merely transcendental, and the concept of 
understanding has only transcendental employment, namely, 
as the unity of the thought of a manifold in general. Thus no 
object is determined through a pure category in which ab- 
straction is made of every condition of sensible intuition the 
only kind of intuition possible to us. It then expresses only the 

tion which can be thought only through a judgment which has 
A 246 quantity (judicium commune)\ reality is that determination 
which can be thought only through an affirmative judgment; 
substance is that which, in relation to intuition, must be the 
last subject of all other determinations. But what sort of a 
thing it is that demands one of these functions rather than 
another, remains altogether undetermined. Thus the cate- 
gories, apart from the condition of sensible intuition, of 
which they contain the synthesis, have no relation to any 
determinate object, cannot therefore define any object, and 
so do not in themselves have the validity of objective concepts. 
1 [Altered by Kant (Nachtrdge, cxxi) to realen.} a [4rt.] 



PHENOMENA AND NOUMENA 265 

thought of an object in general, according to different modes. 
Now the employment of a concept involves a function of judg- 
ment 1 whereby 2 an object is subsumed under the concept, and 
so involves at least the formal condition under which some- 
thing can be given in intuition. If this condition of judgment 
(the schema) is lacking, all subsumption becomes impossible. 
For in that case nothing is given that could be subsumed under 
the concept. The merely transcendental employment of the cate- 
gories is, therefore, really no employment at all, 3 and has no 
determinate object, not even one that is determinable in its A 248 
mere form. It therefore follows that the pure category does not 
suffice for a synthetic a priori principle, that the principles 
of pure understanding are only of empirical, never of tran- 
scendental employment, and that outside the field of possible 
experience there can be no synthetic a priori principles. B 305 

It may be advisable, therefore, to express the situation as 
follows. The pure categories, apart from formal conditions of 
sensibility, have only transcendental meaning ; nevertheless 
they may not be employed transcendentally, such employment 
being in itself impossible, inasmuch as all conditions of any 
employment in judgments 4 are lacking to them, namely, the 
formal conditions of the subsumption of any ostensible 5 object 
under these concepts. Since, then, as pure categories merely, 
they are not to be employed empirically, and cannot be em- 
ployed transcendentally, they cannot, when separated from all 
sensibility, be employed in any manner whatsoever, that is, 
they cannot be applied to any ostensible object. They are the 
pure form of the employment of understanding in respect of 
objects in general, that is, of thought; but since they are 
merely its form, through them alone no object can be thought 
or determined.* 

* [In A follows the passage, omitted in B:] 

Appearances, so far as they are thought as objects accord- 
ing to the unity of the categories, are called phaenomena. But A 249 
if I postulate things which are mere objects of understanding, 
and which, nevertheless, can be given as such to an intuition, 

1 [Urteilskraft.} 2 [Reading, with Erdmann, wodurch for worauf.} 

8 [Kant (Nachtrdge, cxxvii) adds: "for the knowing of anything".] 
4 [in Urteilen.} 5 [angeblichen.] 



266 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

*But we are here subject to an illusion from which it is 
difficult to escape. The categories are not, as regards their 
origin, grounded in sensibility, like the forms of intuition, 
space and time; and they seem, therefore, to allow of an 
application extending beyond all objects of the senses. As a 
matter of fact they are nothing but forms of thought, which 
contain the merely logical faculty of uniting a priori in one con- 
B 306 sciousness the manifold given in intuition; and apart, therefore, 
from the only intuition that is possible to us, they have even 
less meaning than the pure sensible forms. Through these 
forms an object is at least given, whereas a mode of com- 
bining the manifold a mode peculiar to our understanding 
by itself, in the absence of that intuition wherein the mani- 
fold can alone be given, signifies nothing at all. At the 
same time, if we entitle certain objects, as appearances, 
sensible entities 2 (phenomena), then since we thus distin- 
guish the mode in which we intuit them from the nature that 

although not to one 3 that is sensible given therefore 4 cor am 
intuitu intellectuali such things would be entitled noumena 
(intelligibilid) . 

Now we must bear in mind that the concept of appear- 
ances, as limited by the Transcendental Aesthetic, already of 
itself establishes 5 the objective reality of noumena and justifies 
the division of objects into phaenomena and noumena, and so 
of the world into a world of the senses and a world of the under- 
standing (mundus sensibilis et intelligibilis), and indeed in 
such manner that the distinction does not refer merely to the 
logical form of our knowledge of one and the same thing, ac- 
cording as it is indistinct or distinct, but to the difference in 
the manner in which the two worlds can be first given to our 
knowledge, and in conformity with this difference, to the 
manner in which they are in themselves generically distinct 
from one another. For if the senses represent to us something 
merely as it appears, this something must also in itself be a 

1 [The four paragraphs, "But we are here . . . only in a negative sense' 1 
(p. 270, below), added in B.] 

2 [Stnngmuesen.] 

8 [Reading, with Vorlander, einer for der.] 
4 [Reading, with Vaihinger, also for a/s.] 
6 [an die Hand gebeJ] 



PHENOMENA AND NOUMENA 267 

belongs to them in themselves, it is implied in this distinction 
that we place the latter, considered in their own nature, 
although we do not so intuit them, or that we place other 
possible things, which are not objects of our senses but are 
thought as objects merely through the understanding, in 
opposition to the former, and that in so doing we entitle them 
intelligible entities 1 (noumena). The question then arises, 
whether our pure concepts of understanding have meaning 
in respect of these latter, and so can be a way of knowing 
them. 2 

At the very outset, however, we come upon an ambiguity 
which may occasion serious misapprehension. The under- 
standing, when it entitles an object in a [certain] relation 
mere phenomenon, at the same time forms, apart from 
that relation, a representation of an object in itself } and so 
comes to represent itself as also being able to form con- B 307 
cepts of such objects. And since the understanding yields no 
concepts additional to the categories, it also supposes that 
the object in itself must at least be thought through these 

thirTg, and an object of a non-sensible intuition, that is, of the 
understanding. In other words, a [kind of] knowledge must be 
possible, in which there is no sensibility, and which alone has 
reality that is absolutely objective. Through it objects will be 
represented as they are, whereas in the empirical employment 
of our understanding things will be known only as they appear. A 250 
If this be so, it would seem to follow that we cannot assert, 
what we have hitherto maintained, that the pure modes of 
knowledge yielded by our understanding are never anything 
more than principles of the exposition of appearance, and that 
even in their a priori application they relate only to the formal 
possibility of experience. On the contrary, we should have to 
recognise that in addition to the empirical employment of the 
categories, which is limited to sensible conditions, there is like- 
wise a pure and yet objectively valid employment. For a field 
quite different from that of the senses would here lie open to 
us, a world which is thought as it were in the spirit 3 (or even 
perhaps intuited), and which would therefore be for the under- 
standing a far nobler, not a less noble, object of contemplation. 

1 [ Verstandeswesen.] a [eine Erkenntnisart derselben] 8 \tm Geiste.} 



268 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

pure concepts, and so is misled into treating the entirely 
indeterminate concept of an intelligible entity, namely, of a 
something in general outside our sensibility, as being a de- 
terminate concept of an entity that allows of being known in 
a certain [purely intelligible] manner by means of the under- 
standing. 

If by 'noumenon' we mean a thing so far as it is not an 
object of our sensible intuition, and so abstract from our mode 
of intuiting it, this is a noumenon in the negative sense of the 
term. But if we understand by it an object of a non-sensible 
intuition, we thereby presuppose a special mode of intuition, 
namely, the intellectual, which is not that which we possess, 
and of which we cannot comprehend even the possibility. 
This would be 'noumenon' in the positive sense of the term. 

The doctrine of sensibility is likewise the doctrine of the 
noumenon in the negative sense, that is, of things which the 
understanding must think without this reference to our mode 
of intuition, therefore not merely as appearances but as 
things in themselves. At the same time the understanding is 

All our representations are, it is true, referred by the under- 
standing to some object; and since appearances are nothing 
but representations, the understanding refers them to a some- 
thing, as the object of sensible intuition. But this something, 
thus conceived, 1 is only the transcendental object; and by that 
is meant a something = X, of which we know, and with the 
present constitution of our understanding can know, nothing 
whatsoever, but which, 2 as a correlate of the unity of apper- 
ception, can serve only for the unity of the manifold in sensible 
intuition. By means of this unity the understanding combines 
the manifold into the concept of an object. This transcendental 
object cannot be separated from the sense data, for nothing is 
A 251 then left through which it might be thought. Consequently it 
is not in itself an object of knowledge, but only the representa- 
tion of appearances under the concept of an object in general 
a concept which is determinable through the manifold of 
these appearances. 

Just for this reason the categories represent no special ob- 
ject, given to the understanding alone, but only serve to deter- 

1 [in so fern.} * [Reading, with Hartenstein, welches for welcher.] 



PHENOMENA AND NOUMENA 269 

well aware that in viewing things in this manner, as thus 
apart from our mode of intuition, it cannot make any use of B 308 
the categories. For the categories have meaning only in rela- 
tion to the unity of intuition in space and time; and even this 
unity they can determine, by means of general a priori con- 
necting concepts, only because of the mere ideality of space 
and time. In cases where this unity of time is not to be found, 
and therefore in the case of the noumenon, all employment, 
and indeed the whole meaning of the categories, entirely 
vanishes; for we have then no means of determining whether 
things in harmony with the categories are even possible. On 
this point I need only refer the reader to what I have said in 
the opening sentences of the General Note appended to the 
preceding chapter. 1 The possibility of a thing can never be 
proved merely from the fact that its concept is not self-con- 
tradictory, but only through its being supported by some 
corresponding intuition. If, therefore, we should attempt to 
apply the categories to objects which are not viewed as being 
appearances, we should have to postulate an intuition other 

mint the transcendental object, which is the concept of some- 
thing in general, through that which is given in sensibility, in 
order thereby to know appearances empirically under concepts 
of objects. 

The cause of our not being satisfied with the substrate of 
sensibility, and of our therefore adding to the phenomena nou- 
mena which only the pure understanding can think, is simply 
as follows. The sensibility (and its field, that of the appear- 
ances) is itself limited by the understanding in such fashion that 
it does not have to do with things in themselves but only with 
the mode in which, owing to our subjective constitution, they 
appear. The Transcendental Aesthetic, in all its teaching, has 
led to this conclusion; and the same conclusion also, of course, 
follows from the concept of an appearance in general; namely, 
that something which is not in itself appearance must cor- 
respond to it. For appearance can be nothing by itself, outside 
our mode of representation. Unless, therefore, we are to move A 252 
constantly in a circle, the word appearance must be recognised 
as already indicating a relation to something, the immediate 

1 [Above, p. 252.] 



270 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

than the sensible, and the object would thus be a noumenon 
in \h^ positive sense. Since, however, such a type of intuition, 
intellectual intuition, forms no part whatsoever of our 
faculty of knowledge, it follows that the employment of 
the categories can never extend further than to the objects 
of experience. Doubtless, indeed, there are intelligible entities 

B 309 corresponding to the sensible entities; there may also be in- 
telligible entities to which our sensible faculty of intuition 
has no relation whatsoever; but our concepts of understand- 
ing, being mere forms of thought for our sensible intuition, 
could not in the least apply to them. That, therefore, which 
we entitle 'noumenon' must be understood as being such 
only in a negative sense. 

If I remove from empirical knowledge all thought (through 
categories), no knowledge of any object remains. For through 
mere intuition nothing at all is thought, and the fact that this 
affection of sensibility is in me does not [by itself] amount to 
a relation of such representation to any object. But if, on the 

A 254 other hand, I leave aside all intuition, the form of thought 

representation of which is, indeed, sensible, but which, even 
apart from the constitution of our sensibility (upon which the 
form of our intuition is grounded), must be something in itself, 
that is, an object independent of sensibility. 

There thus results the concept of a noumenon. It is not 
indeed in any way positive, and is not a determinate knowledge 
of anything, but signifies only the thought of something in 
general, in which I abstract from everything that belongs to 
the form of sensible intuition. But in order that a noumenon 
may signify a true object, distinguishable from all phenomena, 
it is not enough that I free my thought from all conditions of 
sensible intuition; I must likewise have ground for assuming 
another kind of intuition, different from the sensible, in which 
such an object may be given. For otherwise my thought, while 
indeed without contradictions, is none the less empty. We have 
not, indeed, been able to prove that sensible intuition is the only 
possible intuition, but only that it is so for us. But neither have 
we been able to prove that another kind of intuition is possible. 
Consequently, although our thought can abstract from all 1 

1 [Reading, with Hartenstein,y^^r fm jener.] 



PHENOMENA AND NOUMENA 271 

still remains that is, the mode of determining an object for 
the manifold of a possible intuition. The categories accord- 
ingly extend further than sensible intuition, since they think 
objects in general, without regard to the special mode (the 
sensibility 1 ) in which they may be given. But they do not 
thereby determine a greater sphere of objects. For we cannot 
assume that such objects can be given, without presupposing 
the possibility of another kind of intuition than the sensible; 
and we are by no means justified in so doing. 

If the objective reality of a concept cannot be in any way B 310 
known, while yet the concept contains no contradiction and also 
at the same time is connected with other modes of knowledge 
that involve given concepts which it serves to limit, I entitle 
that concept problematic. The concept of a noumenon that is, 
of a thing which is not to be thought as object of the senses 
but as a thing in itself, solely through a pure understanding 
is not in any way contradictory. For we cannot assert of sensi- 
bility that it is the sole possible kind of intuition. Further, the 

sensibility, it is still an open question whether the notion of 
a noftmenon be not a mere form of a concept, and whether, A 253 
when this separation has been made, any object whatsoever 
is left. 

The object to which I relate appearance in general is 
the transcendental object, that is, the completely indeter- 
minate thought of something in general. This cannot be 
entitled the noumenon] for I know nothing of what it is in 
itself, and have no concept of it save as merely the object of 
a sensible intuition in general, and so as being one and the 
same for all appearances. I cannot think it through any cate- 
gory ; 2 for a category is valid [only] for empirical intuition, as 
bringing it under a concept of object in general. A pure use of 
the category is indeed possible [logically], that is, without con- 
tradiction; but it has no objective validity, since the category 
is not then being applied to any intuition so as to impart to it 
the unity of an object. For the category is a mere function 
of thought, through which no object is given to me, and by 
which I merely think that which may be given in intuition. 

1 [Reading, with Erdmann, die Sinnlichkeit for der Sinnlichkeit^ 
2 [Reading, with Rosenkranz, Kategorie for Kategorien.] 



272 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

concept of a noumenon is necessary, to prevent sensible intuition 
from being extended to things in themselves, and thus to limit 
the objective validity of sensible knowledge. The remaining 

A 255 things, 1 to which it does not apply, are entitled noumena, in 
order to show that this knowledge cannot extend its domain 
over everything which the understanding thinks. But none the 
less we are unable to comprehend how such noumena can be 
possible, and the domain that lies out beyond the sphere of 
appearances is for us empty. That is to say, we have an 
understanding which problematically extends further, but 
we have no intuition, " indeed not even the concept of a 
possible intuition, through which objects outside the field 
of sensibility can be given, and through which the under- 
standing can be employed assertorically beyond that 
field. The concept of a noumenon is thus a merely limiting 

331 1 concept, the function of which is to curb the pretensions of 
sensibility; and it is therefore only of negative employment. 
At the same time it is no arbitrary invention; it is bound up 
with the limitation of sensibility, though it cannot affirm any- 
thing positive beyond the field of sensibility. 

The division of objects into phenomena and noumencT, and 
the world into a world of the senses and a world of the under- 
standing, is therefore quite inadmissible in the positive sense, 2 
although the distinction of concepts as sensible and intellectual 
is certainly legitimate. For no object can be determined for the 
latter concepts, and consequently they cannot be asserted to be 
objectively valid. If we abandon the senses, how shall we make 

A 256 it conceivable that our categories, which would be the sole re- 
maining concepts for noumena, should still continue to signify 
something, since for their relation to any object more must be 
given than merely the unity of thought namely, in addition, 
a possible intuition, to which they may be applied. None the 
less, if the concept of a noumenon be taken in a merely prob- 
lematic sense, it is not only admissible, but as setting limits 
to sensibility is likewise indispensable. But in that case a nou- 
menon is not for our understanding a special [kind of] object, 
namely, an intelligible object] the [sort of] understanding to 
which it might belong is itself a problem. For we cannot in 

1 [Reading, with Erdmann, die iibrigen for das iibrige.] 
2 [" in the positive sense " added in B.] 



PHENOMENA AND NOUMENA 273 

the least represent to ourselves the possibility of an under- 
standing which should know its object, not discursively 
through categories, but intuitively in a non-sensible intuition. B 312 
What our understanding acquires through this concept of a 
noumenon, is a negative extension; that is to say, under- 
standing is not limited through sensibility; on the contrary, 
it itself limits sensibility by applying the term noumena to 
things in themselves (things not regarded as appearances). 
But in so doing it at the same time sets limits to itself, recog- 
nising that it cannot know these noumena through any of the 
categories, and that it must therefore think them only under 
the title of an unknown something. 

In the writings of modern philosophers I find the expres- 
sions mundus sensibilis and intelligibilis ' used with a mean- 
ing altogether different from that of the ancients a meaning A 257 
which is easily understood, but which results merely in an 
empty play upon words. According to this usage, some have 
thought good to entitle the sum of appearances, in so far as 
they are intuited, the world of the senses, and in so far as their 
connection is thought in conformity with laws of understand- 
ing, the world of the understanding. Observational x astronomy, 6313 
which teaches merely the observation of the starry heavens, 
would give an account of the former; theoretical astronomy, 
on the other hand, as taught according to the Copernican 
system, or according to Newton's laws of gravitation, would 
give an account of the second, namely, of an intelligible 
world. But such a twisting of words is a merely sophistical 
subterfuge; it seeks to avoid a troublesome question by 
changing its meaning to suit our own convenience. Under- 
standing and reason are, indeed, employed in dealing with 
appearances; but the question to be answered is whether they 
have also yet another employment, when the object is not a 

a We must not, in place of the expression mundus intelligibility 
use the expression ' an intellectual world ', as is commonly done 
in German exposition. For only modes of knowledge are either 
intellectual or sensuous. 2 What can only be an object of the one 
or the other kind of intuition must be entitled (however harsh- 
sounding) intelligible or sensible. 3 

1 [Transposing, with Wille, theoretische and kontemplative.] 
* \tntellektuell, oder sensitiv.} 8 \intelligibel oder sensibel.] 

T 



274 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

phenomenon (that is, is a noumenon); and it is in this latter 
sense that the object is taken, when it is thought as merely 
intelligible, that is to say, as being given to the understanding 
alone, and not to the senses. The question, therefore, is whether 
in addition to the empirical employment of the understanding 
to its employment even in the Newtonian account of the 
structure of the universe there is likewise possible a tran- 
scendental employment, which has to do with the noumenon 
as an object. This question we have answered in the negative. 

A 258 When, therefore, we say that the senses represent objects 
as they appear, and the understanding objects as they are, the 
latter statement is to be taken, not in the transcendental, but 
in the merely empirical meaning of the terms, namely as 
meaning that the objects must be represented as objects of 
experience, that is, as appearances in thoroughgoing inter- 

B 314 connection with one another, and not as they may be apart 
from their relation to possible experience (and consequently 
to any senses), as objects of the pure understanding. Such 
objects of pure understanding will always remain unknown 
to us; we can never even know whether such a transcen- 
dental or exceptional l knowledge is possible under any 3 con- 
ditions at least not if it is to be the same kind of know- 
ledge as that which stands under our ordinary categories. 
Understanding and sensibility, with us, can determine objects 
only when they are employed in conjunction. When we separ- 
ate them, we have intuitions without concepts, or concepts 
without intuitions in both cases, representations which we 
are not in a position to apply to any determinate object. 

If, after all these explanations, any one still hesitates to 
abandon the merely transcendental employment of the cate- 
gories, let him attempt to obtain from them a synthetic pro- 
position. An analytic proposition carries the understanding no 
further; for since it is concerned only with what is already 
thought in the concept, it leaves undecided whether this con- 
cept has in itself any relation to objects, or merely signifies 

A 259 the unity of thought in general complete abstraction being 
made from the mode in which an object may be given. The 
understanding [in its analytic employment] is concerned only 
to know what lies in the concept; it is indifferent as to the 

1 [Vaihinger reads aussersinnliche for 



PHENOMENA AND NOUMENA 275 

object to which the concept may apply. The attempt must 
therefore be made with a synthetic and professedly tran- B 315 
scendental principle, as, for instance, 'Everything that exists, 
exists as substance, or as a determination inherent in it', or 
'Everything contingent exists as an effect of some other thing, 
namely, of its cause'. Now whence, I ask, can the understand- 
ing obtain these synthetic propositions, when the concepts are 
to be applied, not in their relation to possible experience, but 
to things in themselves (noumena)? Where is here that third 
something, which is always required for a synthetic proposi- 
tion, in order that, by its mediation, the concepts which have 
no logical (analytic) affinity may be brought into connection 
with one another? The proposition can never be established, 
nay, more, even the possibility of any such pure assertion can- 
not be shown, without appealing to the empirical employment 
of the understanding, and thereby departing completely from 
the pure and non-sensible judgment. Thus the concept of pure 
and merely intelligible objects is completely lacking in all 
principles that might make possible its application. For we 
cannot think of any way in which such intelligible objects 
might be given. The problematic thought which leaves open 
a place for them serves only, like an empty space, for the 
limitation of empirical principles, without itself containing or A 260 
revealing any other object of knowledge beyond the sphere of 
those principles. 



B 3 i6 APPENDIX 

THE AMPHIBOLY OF CONCEPTS OF REFLECTION 1 

ARISING FROM THE CONFUSION OF THE EMPIRICAL WITH THE 
TRANSCENDENTAL EMPLOYMENT OF UNDERSTANDING 

Reflection* (reflexio) does not concern itself with objects them- 
selves with a view to deriving concepts from them directly, 
but is that state of mind in which we first set ourselves 
to discover the subjective conditions under which [alone] we 
are able to arrive at concepts. It is the consciousness of the re- 
lation of given representations to our different sources of know- 
ledge; and only by way of such consciousness can the relation 
of the sources of knowledge to one another be rightly deter- 
mined. Prior to all further treatment of our representations, 3 
this question must first be asked: In which of our cognitive 
faculties are our representations connected together? Is it the 
understanding, or is it the senses, by 4 which they are combined 
or compared? Many a judgment is accepted owing to custom 
or is grounded in inclination; but since no reflection precedes 

A 261 it, or at least none follows critically upon it, it is taken as 
having originated in the understanding. An examination 
(i.e. the direction of our attention to the grounds of the truth 
of a judgment) is not indeed required in every case; for if the 

B 317 judgment is immediately certain (for instance, the judgment 
that between two points there can only be one straight line), 
there can be no better evidence of its truth than the judgment 
itself. All judgments, however, and indeed all comparisons, 
require reflection, i.e. distinction of the cognitive faculty to 
which the given concepts belong. The act by which I confront 

1 \der Reflcxtonsbegriffe^ a [ Uberlegung^ 

8 [Reading, with Erdmann, Vorstellungen for Vorstellung.] 
4 [Reading, with Erdmann, v on for vor.] 
276 



CONCEPTS OF REFLECTION 277 

the comparison of representations with the cognitive faculty 
to which it belongs, and by means of which I distinguish 
whether it is as belonging to the pure understanding or to 
sensible intuition that they are to be compared with each 
other, I call transcendental reflection. Now the relations 1 in 
which concepts in a state of mind 2 can stand to one another are 
those of identity and difference^ of agreement and opposition^ 
of the inner and the outer, and finally of the determinate and 
the determination (matter and form). The right determining 
of the relation depends on the answer to the question, in which 
faculty of knowledge they belong together subjectively in the 
sensibility or in the understanding. For the difference between 
the faculties makes a great difference to the mode in which we 
have to think the relations. 

Before constructing any objective judgment we compare A 262 
the concepts to find 3 in them identity (of many representa- 
tions under one concept) with a view to universal judgments, 
difference with a view to particular judgments, agreement B 318 
with a view to affirmative judgments, opposition with a view 
to negative judgments, etc. For this reason we ought, it seems, 
to call the above-mentioned concepts, concepts of comparison 
(conceptus comparationis). If, however, the question is not 
about the logical form, but about the content of the concepts, 
i.e. whether things are themselves identical or different, in 
agreement or in opposition, etc., then since the things can have 
a twofold relation to our faculty of knowledge, namely, to sensi- 
bility and to understanding, it is the place to which they belong 
in this regard that determines the mode in which they belong 
to one another. For this reason the interrelations of given re- 
presentations can be determined only through transcendental 
reflection, that is, through [consciousness of] their relation to 
one or other of the two kinds of knowledge. Whether things are 
identical or different, in agreement or in opposition, etc., can- 
not be established at once from the concepts themselves by 
mere comparison (comparatio), but solely by means of tran- 
scendental consideration (reflexid), through distinction of the 
cognitive faculty to which they belong. We may therefore say 

1 [Reading, with Hartenstein, Die Verhdltnisse . . . sind for Das Verhaltnis 
. . . sind^\ * [in einem Gemutszustande^\ 

8 [Adding, with Erdmann, zu treffen] 



278 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

that logical reflection is a mere act of comparison; for since 
we take no account whatsoever of the faculty of knowledge to 
which the given representations belong, the representations 
B 319 must be treated as being, so far as their place in the mind is 
concerned, all of the same order. Transcendental reflection, on 
the other hand, since it bears on the objects themselves, con- 
tains the ground of the possibility of the objective comparison 
of representations with each other, and is therefore altogether 
A 263 different from the former type of reflection. 1 Indeed they do 
not even belong to the same faculty of knowledge. This trans- 
cendental consideration is a duty from which nobody who 
wishes to make any a priori judgments about things can claim 
exemption. We shall now take it in hand, and in so doing shall 
obtain no little light for the determining of the real business 
of the understanding. 

I. Identity and Difference. If an object is presented to us 
on several occasions but always with the same inner determina- 
tions (qualitas et quantitas), then if it be taken as object of 
pure understanding, it is always one and the same, only one 
thing (numerica identitas) } not many. But if it is appearance, 
we are not concerned to compare concepts; even if there is 
no difference whatever as regards the concepts, difference of 
spatial position at one and the same time is still an adequate 
ground for the numerical difference of the object, that is, of the 
object of the senses. Thus in the case of two drops of water 
we can abstract altogether from all internal difference (of 
A 264 quality and quantity), and the mere fact that they have been 
intuited simultaneously in different spatial positions is sufH- 
B 320 cient justification for holding them to be numerically different. 
Leibniz took the appearances for things-in-themselves, and so 
for intelligibilia, i.e. objects of the pure understanding (al- 
though, on account of the confused character of our represen- 
tations of them, he still gave them the name of phenomena), 
and on that assumption his principle of the identity of indis- 
cernibles (principium identitatis indiscernibilium) certainly 
could not be disputed. But since they are objects of sensibility, 
in relation to which the employment of the understanding is 
not pure but only empirical, plurality and numerical difference 
are already given us by space itself, the condition of outer 

1 [Reading, with Vaihinger, ersteren for letzteren.] 



CONCEPTS OF REFLECTION 279 

appearances. For one part of space, although completely simi- 
lar and equal to another part, is still outside the other, and for 
this very reason is a different part, which when added to it 
constitutes with it a greater space. The same must be true of 
all things which exist simultaneously in the different spatial 
positions, however similar and equal they may otherwise be. 

2. Agreement and Opposition. If reality is represented 
only by the pure understanding (realitas noumenon), no oppo- 
sition can be conceived between the realities, i.e. no relation 

of such a kind that, when combined in the same subject, they A 265- 
cancel each other's consequences and take a form like 3-3=0. 
On the other hand, the real in appearance (realitas phaeno- 
menon) may certainly allow of opposition. When such realities B 321 
are combined in the same subject, one may wholly or partially 
destroy the consequences of another, as in the case of two 
moving forces in the same straight line, in so far as they either 
attract or impel a point in opposite directions, or again in the 
case of a pleasure counterbalancing pain. 

3. The Inner and the Outer. In an object of the pure 
understanding that only is inward which has no relation what- 
soever (so far as its existence is concerned) to anything different 
from itself. It is quite otherwise with a substantia phaenomenon 
in space; its inner determinations are nothing but relations, and 
it itself is entirely made up of mere relations. We are acquainted 
with substance in space only through forces which are active 
in this and that space, either bringing other objects to it (at- 
traction), or preventing them penetrating into it (repulsion 
and impenetrability). We are not acquainted with any other 
properties constituting the concept of the substance which 
appears in space and which we call matter. As object of pure 
understanding, on the other hand, every substance must have 
inner determinations and powers which pertain to its inner 
reality. But what inner accidents can I entertain in thought, 
save only those which my inner sense presents to me? They A 266 
must be something which is either itself a thinking^- or ana- 
logous to thinking. For this reason Leibniz, regarding sub- 
stances as noumena, took away from them, by the manner in B 322. 
which he conceived them, whatever might signify outer re- 
lation, including also, therefore, composition, and so made 

1 [ Denken.j 



KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

them all, even the constituents of matter, simple subjects with 
powers of representation in a word, MONADS. 

4. Matter and Form. These two concepts underlie all 
other reflection, so inseparably are they bound up with all 
employment of the understanding. The one [matter] signifies 
the determinable in general, the other [form] its determina- 
tion both in the transcendental sense, abstraction being 
made from all differences in that which is given and from the 
mode in which it is determined Logicians formerly gave the 
name 'matter* to the universal, and the name 'form' to the 
specific difference. In any judgment we can call the given 
concepts logical matter (i.e. matter for the judgment), and 
their relation (by means of the copula) the form of the judg- 
ment. In every being the constituent elements of it (essentialia) 
are the matter, the mode in which they are combined in one 
thing the essential form. Also as regards things in general 
unlimited reality was viewed as the matter of all possibility, 

A 267 and its limitation (negation) as being the form by which one 
thing is distinguished from others according to transcendental 

B 323 concepts. The understanding, in order that it may be in a posi- 
tion to determine anything in definite fashion, demands' that 
something be first given, at least in concept. Consequently in 
the concept of the pure understanding matter is prior to form; 
and for this reason Leibniz first assumed things (monads), 
and within them a power of representation, in order after- 
wards to found on this their outer relation and the community 
of their states (i.e. of the representations). Space and time 
the former through the relation of substances, the latter 
through the connection of their determinations among them- 
selves were thus, on this view, possible as grounds and con- 
sequents. This, in fact, is how it would necessarily be, if the 
pure understanding could be directed immediately to objects, 
and if space and time were determinations of things-in-them- 
selves. But if they are only sensible intuitions, in which we 
determine all objects merely as appearances, then the form of 
intuition (as a subjective property of sensibility) is prior to all 
matter (sensations); space and time come before all appear- 
ances and before all data of experience, and are indeed what 
make the latter at all possible. The intellectualist philo- 
sopher could not endure to think of the form as preceding 



CONCEPTS OF REFLECTION 281 

the things themselves and determining their possibility a 
perfectly just criticism on the assumption that we intuit things 
as they really are, although in confused representation. But A 268 
since sensible intuition is a quite specific subjective condition, 
which lies a priori at the foundation of all perception, as its B 324 
original form, it follows that the form is given by itself, and that 
so far is the matter (or the things themselves which appear x ) 
from serving as the foundation (as we should have to judge 
if we followed mere concepts) that on the contrary its own 
possibility presupposes a formal intuition (time and space) 
as antecedently given. 

NOTE TO THE AMPHIBOLY OF CONCEPTS OF REFLECTION 

Let me call the place which we assign to a concept, either 
in sensibility or in pure understanding, its transcendental 
location. Thus the decision as to the place which belongs to 
every concept according to difference in the use to which it 
is put, and the directions for determining this place for all 
concepts according to rules, is a transcendental topic. This 
doctrine, in distinguishing the cognitive faculty to which in 
each case the concepts properly belong, will provide a sure 
safeguard against the surreptitious employment of pure under- 
standing and the delusions which arise therefrom. We may 
call every concept, every heading, under which many items of 
knowledge fall, a logical location. On this is based the logical 
topic of Aristotle, of which teachers and orators could make 
use in order under given headings of thought to find what | B ^? 
would best suit the matter in hand, and then, with some 
appearance of thoroughness, to argue or be eloquent about it. 

The transcendental topic, on the other hand, contains no 
more than the above-mentioned four headings of all com- 
parison and distinction. They are distinguished from cate- 
gories by the fact that they do not present the object accord- 
ing to what constitutes its concept (quantity, reality), but 
only serve to describe in all its manifoldness the comparison 
of the representations which is prior to the concept of things. 
But this comparison requires in the first place a reflection, 
that is, a determination of the location to which the repre- 

1 [Reading, with 4th edition, erscheinen for erschienen.] 



282 KANTS CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

sentations of the things that are being compared belong, 
namely, whether they are thought by the pure understanding 
or given in appearance by sensibility. 

Concepts can be compared logically without our troubling 
to which faculty their objects belong, that is, as to whether 
their objects are noumena for the understanding, or are 
phenomena for the sensibility. But if we wish to advance 
to the objects with these concepts, we must first resort to tran- 
scendental reflection, in order to determine for which cognitive 
faculty they are to be objects, whether for pure understanding 
or for sensibility. In the absence of such reflection, the use of 

B 126J tnese concepts is very unsafe, giving birth to alleged synthetic 
principles, which the critical reason cannot recognise, and 
which are based on nothing better than a transcendental 
amphiboly, that is, a confounding of an object of pure under- 
standing with appearance. 

Having no such transcendental topic, and being therefore 
deceived by the amphiboly of the concepts of reflection, the 
celebrated Leibniz erected an intellectual system of the world, 
or rather believed that he could obtain knowledge of the 
inner nature of things by comparing all objects merely with 
the understanding and with the separated, 1 formal concepts 
of its thought. Our table of concepts of reflection gives us the 
unexpected advantage of putting before our eyes the distinct- 
ive features of his system in all its parts, and at the same time 
the chief ground of this peculiar way of thinking, which indeed 
rested on nothing but a misunderstanding. He compared all 
things with each other by means of concepts alone, and natur- 
ally found no other differences save those only through which 
the understanding distinguishes its pure concepts from one 
another. The conditions of sensible intuition, which carry 
with them their own differences, he did not regard as original, 
sensibility being for him only a confused mode of representa- 
tion, and not a separate source of representations. Appear- 
ance was, on his view, the representation of the thing in 
itself. Such representation is indeed, as he recognised, 

g 2 ? * I different in logical form from knowledge through the under- 
standing, since, owing to its usual lack of analysis, it intro- 
duces a certain admixture of accompanying representations 

1 \abgesondct 'ten .] 



CONCEPTS OF REFLECTION 283 

into the concept of the thing, an admixture which the under- 
standing knows how to separate from it. In a word, Leibniz 
intellectualised appearances, just as Locke, according to his 
system of noogony (if I may be allowed the use of such ex- 
pressions), sensualized all concepts of the understanding, i.e. 
interpreted them as nothing more than empirical or abstracted 
concepts of reflection. Instead of seeking in understanding 
and sensibility two sources of representations which, while 
quite different, can supply objectively valid judgments of 
things only in conjunction with each other, each of these great 
men holds to one only of the two, viewing it as in immediate 
relation to things in themselves. The other faculty is then 
regarded as serving only to confuse or to order the represen- 
tations which this selected faculty yields. 

Leibniz therefore compared the objects of the senses 
with each other merely in regard to understanding, taking 
them as things in general. First, he compared them in so far 
as they are to be judged by understanding to be identical or 
to be different. And since he had before him only their con- 
cepts and not their position in intuition (wherein alone the 
objects can be given), and left entirely out of account the 
transcendental place of these concepts (whether the object is 
to be reckoned among appearances or things in themselves), 
it inevitably followed that he should extend his principle of ( g 2 ^ 
the identity of indiscernibles, which is valid only of concepts 
of things in general, to cover also the objects of the senses 
(mundus phaenomenori), and that he should believe that in 
so doing he had advanced our knowledge of nature in no 
small degree. Certainly, if I know a drop of water in all its 
internal determinations as a thing in itself, and if the whole 
concept of any one drop is identical with that of every other, 
I cannot allow that any drop is different from any other. But 
if the drop is an appearance in space, it has its location not 
only in understanding (under concepts) but in sensible outer 
intuition (in space), and the physical locations are there quite 
indifferent to the inner determinations of the things. A loca- 
tion b can contain a thing which is completely similar and 
equal to another in a location #, just as easily as if the things 
were inwardly ever so different. Difference of locations, with- 
out any further conditions, makes the plurality and distinction 



284 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

of objects, as appearances, not only possible but also neces- 
sary. Consequently, the above so-called law is no law of 
nature. It is only an analytic rule for 1 the comparison of 
things through mere concepts. 

Secondly, the principle that realities (as pure assertions) 

B 320 } never logically conflict with each other is an entirely true 
proposition as regards the relation of concepts, but has not 
the least meaning in regard either to nature or to anything 
in itself. For real conflict certainly does take place; there are 
cases where A-B = o, that is, where two realities combined 
in one subject cancel one another's effects. This is brought 
before our eyes incessantly by all the hindering and counter- 
acting processes in nature, which, as depending on forces, 
must be called realitatis phaenomena. General mechanics can 
indeed give the empirical condition of this conflict in an a 
priori rule, since it takes account of the opposition in the 
direction of forces, a condition totally ignored by the tran- 
scendental concept of reality. Although Herr von Leibniz did 
not indeed announce the above proposition with all the pomp 
of a new principle, he yet made use of it for new assertions, 
and his successors expressly incorporated it into their L*eib- 
nizian-Wolffian system. Thus, according to this principle all 
evils are merely consequences of the limitations of created 
beings, that is, negations, since negations alone conflict 
with reality. (This is indeed the case as regards the mere 
concept of a thing in general, but not as regards things as 
appearances.) Similarly his disciples consider it not only pos- 

33 j sible, but even natural, to combine all reality in one being, 
without fear of any conflict. For the only conflict which they 
recognise is that of contradiction, whereby the concept of a 
thing is itself removed. They do not admit the conflict of re- 
ciprocal injury, in which each of two real grounds destroys the 
effect of the other a conflict which we can represent to our- 
selves only in terms of conditions presented to us in sensibility. 
Thirdly, Leibniz's monadology has no basis whatsoever 
save his mode of representing the distinction of inner and 
outer merely in relation to the understanding. Substances in 
general must have some internal nature, which is therefore 
free from all outer relations, and consequently also from com- 

1 [Reading, with the 4th edition, der for oder.] 



CONCEPTS OF REFLECTION 285 

position. The simple is therefore the basis of that which is 
inner in things-in-themselves. But that which is inner in the 
state of a substance cannot consist in place, shape, contact, 
or motion (these determinations being all outer relations), and 
we can therefore assign to substances no inner state save that 
through which we ourselves inwardly determine our sense, 
namely, the state of the representations. This, therefore, com- 
pleted the conception of the monads, which, though they have 
to serve as the basic material of the whole universe, have no 
other active power save only that which consists in representa- 
tions, the efficacy of which is confined, strictly speaking, to 
themselves. 

For this very reason his principle of the possible reciprocal 
community of substances had to be a pre-established harmony ', 
and could not be a physical influence. For since everything is 
merely inward, i.e. concerned with its own representations, the 
state of the representations of one substance could not stand 
in any effective connection whatever with that of another. 
There had to be some third cause, determining all substances 
whatsoever, and so making their states correspond to each 
other, not indeed by an occasional special intervention in each 
particular case (systema assistentiae), but by the unity of the 
idea of a cause valid for all substances, and in which they 
must one and all obtain their existence and permanence, and 
consequently also their reciprocal correspondence, according 
to universal laws. 

Fourthly, Leibniz's famous doctrine of time and space, in 
which he intellectualised these forms of sensibility, owed its 
origin entirely to this same fallacy 1 of transcendental reflec- 
tion. If I attempt, by the mere understanding, to represent to 
myself outer relations of things, this can only be done by means 
of a concept of their reciprocal action; and if I seek to connect 
two states of one and the same thing, this can only be in the 
order of grounds and consequences. Accordingly, Leibniz 
conceived space as a certain order in the community of sub- 
stances, and time as the dynamical sequence of their states. 
That which space and time seem to possess as proper to them- 
selves, in independence of things, he ascribed to the confusion j^ ^32 
in their concepts, which has led us to regard what is a mere 

1 [Tausehung.] 



286 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

form of dynamical relations as being a special intuition, self- 
subsistent and antecedent to the things themselves. Thus space 
and time were for him the intelligible form of the connection 
of things (substances and their states) in themselves; and the 
things were intelligible substances (substantiate noumena). 
And since he allowed sensibility no mode of intuition peculiar 
to itself but sought for all representation of objects, even the 
empirical, in the understanding, and left to the senses nothing 
but the despicable task of confusing and distorting the repre- 
sentations of the former, he had no option save to treat the 
[intellectualised] concepts as being likewise valid of appear- 
ances. 

But even if we could by pure understanding say anything 
synthetically in regard to things-in-themselves (which, how- 
ever, is impossible), it still could not be applied to appear- 
ances, which do not represent things-in-themselves. In dealing 
with appearances I shall always be obliged to compare my 
concepts, in transcendental reflection, solely under the con- 
ditions of sensibility; and accordingly space and time will not 
be determinations of things-in-themselves but of appearances. 
A 277 1 what the things-in-themselves may be I do not know, nor do 
I need to know, since a thing can never come before me except 
in appearance. 

The remaining concepts of reflection have to be dealt with 
in the same manner. Matter is substantia phaenomenon. That 
which inwardly belongs to it I seek in all parts of the space 
which it occupies, and in all effects which it exercises, though 
admittedly these can only be appearances of outer sense. I 
have therefore nothing that is absolutely, but only what is 
comparatively inward and is itself again composed of outer 
relations. The absolutely inward [nature] of matter, as it would 
have to be conceived by pure understanding, is nothing but 
a phantom; 1 for matter is not among the objects of pure 
understanding, and the transcendental object which may be 
the ground of this appearance that we call matter is a mere 
something of which we should not understand what it is, even 
if someone were in a position to tell us. For we can understand 
only that which brings with it, in intuition, something corre- 
sponding to our words. If by the complaints that we have no 

1 [Grille.] 



CONCEPTS OF REFLECTION 287 

insight whatsoever into the inner [nature] of things it be 
meant that we cannot conceive by pure understanding what 
the things which appear to us may be in themselves, they are 
entirely illegitimate and unreasonable. For what is demanded 
is that we should be able to know things, and therefore to 
intuit them, without senses, and therefore that we should have 
a faculty of knowledge altogether different from the human, j 2 ? 8 
and this not only in degree but as regards intuition likewise 
in kind in other words, that we should be not men but 
beings l of whom we are unable to say whether they are even 
possible, much less how they are constituted. Through ob- 
servation and analysis of appearances we penetrate to nature's 
inner recesses, and no one can say how far this knowledge 
may in time extend. But with all this knowledge, and even if 
the whole of nature were revealed to us, we should still never 
be able to answer those transcendental questions which go 
beyond nature. The reason of this is that it is not given to us 
to observe our own mind with any other intuition than that 
of inner sense; and that it is yet precisely in the mind that 
the secret of the source of our sensibility is located. The rela- 
tion of sensibility to an object and what the transcendental 
ground of this [objective] unity may be, are matters undoubtedly 
so deeply concealed that we, who after all know even ourselves 
only through inner sense and therefore as appearance, can 
never be justified in treating sensibility as being a suitable 
instrument of investigation for discovering anything save 
always still other appearances eager as we yet are to explore 
their non-sensible cause. 

What makes this critique of conclusions based merely on 
acts of reflection so exceedingly useful is that it renders mani- 
fest the nullity of all conclusions about objects which are 
compared with each other solely in the understanding, and at 
the same time confirms our principal contention, namely, that 
although appearances are not included as things-in-them- 
selves among the objects of pure understanding, they are yet 
the only objects in regard to which our knowledge can possess 
objective reality, that is, in respect of which there is an in- 
tuition corresponding to the concepts. 

If we reflect in a merely logical fashion, we are only com- 
1 [Wesen.] 



288 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

paring our concepts with each other in the understanding, to 
find whether both have the same content, whether they are 
contradictory or not, whether something is contained within 
the concept or is an addition from outside, which of the two 
is given and which should serve only as a mode of thinking 
what is given. But if I apply these concepts to an object in 
general (in the transcendental sense), without determining 
whether it be an object of sensible or of intellectual intuition, 
limitations are at once revealed in the very notion of this 
object which forbid 1 any non-empirical employment of the 
concepts, and by this very fact prove that the representation 
of an object as a thing in general is not only insufficient, but, 
when taken without sensible determination, and independ- 
ently of any empirical condition, self -contradictory. The con- 
clusion is that we must either abstract from any and every 
object (as in logic), or, if we admit an object, must think it 
under the conditions of sensible intuition. For the intelligible 
would require a quite peculiar intuition which we do not 
B 336 possess, and in the absence of this would be for us nothing at 
A 280 all; and, on the other hand, it is also evident that appearances 
could not be objects in themselves. If I think to myself merely 
things in general, the difference in their outer relations cannot 
constitute a difference in the things themselves; on the con- 
trary, it presupposes this difference. And if there is no inward 
difference between the concept of the one and the concept of the 
other, f am only positing one and the same thing in different 
relations. Further, the addition of one sheer 2 affirmation 
(reality}) to another increases the positive in them; nothing is 
withdrawn or inhibited; accordingly the real in things cannot 
be in conflict with itself and so on. 



As we have shown, the concepts of reflection, owing to a 
certain misinterpretation, have exercised so great an influence 
upon the employment of the understanding that they have 
misled even one of the most acute of all philosophers into a 
supposititious system of intellectual knowledge, which under- 

1 [Reading, with Vaihinger, nicht empirischen . , . verwehren for empirischen 
. . . verkehren.] 

2 [blossen.] 



CONCEPTS OF REFLECTION 289 

takes to determine its objects without any assistance from the 
senses. For this reason the exposition of the cause of what is 
deceptive occasioning these false principles in the amphi- 
boly of these concepts, is of great utility as a reliable method of 
determining and securing the limits of the understanding. 

It is indeed true that whatever universally agrees with or B 337 
contradicts a concept also agrees with or contradicts every A 281 
particular which is contained under it (dictum de omni et 
nullo)\ but it would be absurd to alter this logical principle so 
as to read: what is not contained in a universal concept is also 
not included in the particular concepts which stand under it. 
For these are particular concepts just because they include in 
themselves more than is thought in the universal. Nevertheless 
it is upon this latter principle that the whole intellectual sys- 
tem of Leibniz is based; and with this principle it therefore 
falls, together with all the ambiguities (in the employment of 
the understanding) that have thence arisen. 

The principle of the identity of indiscernibles is really based 
on the presupposition, that if a certain distinction is not found 
in the concept of a thing in general, it is also not to be found 
in The things themselves, and consequently that all things 
which are not distinguishable from one another in their con- 
cepts (in quality or quantity) are completely identical (numero 
eadem). Because in the mere concept of a thing in general we 
abstract from the many necessary conditions of its x intuition, 
the conditions from which we have abstracted are, with strange 
presumption, treated as not being there at all, and nothing is B 338 
allowed to the thing beyond what is contained in its concept. 

The concept of a cubic foot of space, wherever and how- A 282 
ever often I think it, is in itself throughout one and the same. 
But two cubic feet are nevertheless distinguished in space by 
the mere difference of their locations (numero diver sa)\ these 
locations are conditions of the intuition wherein the object of 
this concept is given; they do not, however, belong to the con- 
cept but entirely to sensibility. 2 Similarly there is no conflict 
in the concept of a thing unless a negative statement is com- 
bined with an affirmative; merely affirmative concepts cannot, 
when combined, produce any cancellation. But in the sensible 

1 [Reading, with Erdmann, seiner for etner.] 
2 [*ur ganzcn 



2QO KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

intuition, wherein reality (e.g. motion) is given, there are 
conditions (opposite directions), which have been omitted in 
the concept of motion in general, that make possible a conflict 
(though not indeed a logical one), namely, as producing from 
what is entirely positive a zero ( = o). We are not, therefore, in 
a position to say that since conflict is not to be met with in 
the concepts of reality, all reality is in 1 agreement with itself." 

A 283 } According to mere concepts the inner is the substratum of 
all relational 2 or outer determinations. If, therefore, I abstract 
from all conditions of intuition and confine myself to the con- 
cept of a thing in general, I can abstract from all outer rela- 
tion, and there must still be left a concept of something which 
signifies no relation, but inner determinations only. From this 
it seems to follow that in whatever is a thing (substance) there 
is something which is absolutely inward and precedes all outer 
determinations, inasmuch as it is what first makes them 
possible; and consequently, that this substratum, as no longer 
containing in itself any outer relations, is simple. (Corporeal 
things are never anything save relations only, at least of 
their parts external to each other.) And since we know of no 
determinations which are absolutely inner except those [given] 
through our inner sense, this substratum is not only simple; 
it is likewise (in analogy with our inner sense) determined 
through representations'^ in other words, all things are really 

B 340 monads, simple beings endowed with representations. These 
contentions would be entirely justified, if beyond the con- 

A 284 cept of a thing in general there were no further conditions 
under which alone objects of outer intuition can be given us 
those from which the pure concept has [as a matter of fact] 

a If we here wished to resort to the usual subterfuge, maintaining 
as regards realitates noumena that they at least do not act in opposi- 
tion to each other, it would be incumbent on us to produce an ex- 
B 339 ample of such pure and non-sensuous reality, that it may be dis- 
cerned whether such a concept represents something or nothing. 
But no example can be obtained otherwise than from experience, 
which never yields more than phenomena. This proposition has 
therefore no further meaning than that a concept which only in- 
cludes affirmation includes no negation a proposition which we 
have never doubted. 

1 [Reading, with Hartenstein, in Einstimmung for Einstimmung^ 
* [Reading, with Hartenstein, Verhdltnis- for Verhaltnis.] 



CONCEPTS OF REFLECTION 291 

made abstraction. For under these further conditions, as we 
find, an abiding appearance in space (impenetrable extension) 
can contain only relations and nothing at all that is absolutely 
inward, and yet be the primary substratum of all outer per- 
ception. Through mere concepts I cannot, indeed, think what 
is outer without thinking something that is inner; l and this 
for the sufficient reason that concepts of relation presuppose 
things which are absolutely [i.e. independently] given, and 
without these are impossible. But something is contained in 
intuition which is not to be met with in the mere concept of a 
thing; and this yields the substratum, which could never be 
known through mere concepts, namely, a 2 space which with all 
that it contains consists solely of relations, formal or, it may be, 
also real. Because, without an absolutely inner element, a thing 
can never be represented by mere concepts, I may not therefore 
claim that there is not also in the things themselves which are 
subsumed under these concepts, and in their intuition, some- 
thing external that has no basis in anything wholly inward. 
Once we have abstracted from all conditions of intuition, there 
is, I admit, nothing left in the mere concept but the inner in B 341 
general and its interrelations, through which alone the ex- 
ternal is possible. But this necessity, which is founded solely 
on abstraction, does not arise in the case of things as given in 
intuition with determinations that express mere relations, with- A 285 
out having anything inward as their basis; for such are not 
things in themselves but merely appearances. All that we 
know in matter is merely relations (what we call the inner 
determinations of it are inward only in a comparative sense), 
but among these relations some are self-subsistent and per- 
manent, and through these we are given a determinate object. 
The fact that, if I abstract from these relations, there is no- 
thing more left for me to think does not rule out the concept 
of a thing as appearance, nor indeed the concept of an object 
in abstracto. What it does remove is all possibility of an object 
determinable through mere concepts, that is, of a noumenon. 
It is certainly startling to hear that a thing is to be taken as 
consisting wholly of relations. Such a thing is, however, mere 
appearance, and cannot be thought through pure categories; 

1 [Reading, with the 4th edition, Inneres for I-nnerem.} 
8 [Reading, with Mellin, tinen for tin.} 



292 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

what it itself consists in is the mere relation of something in 
general to the senses. Similarly, if we begin with mere con- 
cepts, we cannot think the relations of things in abstracto in 

B 342 any other manner than by regarding one thing as the cause of 
determinations in another, for that is how our understanding 
conceives of relations. But since we are in that case disregard- 
ing all intuition, we have ruled ourselves out from any kind of 
recognition of the special mode in which the different elements 
of the manifold determine each other's positions, that is, of 

A 286 the form of sensibility (space), which yet is presupposed in all 
empirical causality. 

If by merely intelligible objects we mean those things which 
are thought 1 through pure categories, without any schema 
of sensibility, such objects are impossible. For the condition of 
the objective employment of all our concepts of understanding 
is merely the mode of our sensible intuition, by which objects 
are given us; if we abstract from these objects, the con- 
cepts have no relation to any object. Even if we were willing 
to assume a kind of intuition other than this our sensible 
kind, the functions of our thought would still be without 
meaning in respect to it. If, however, we have in mind only 
objects of a non-sensible intuition, in respect of which our 
categories are admittedly not valid, and of which therefore 
we can never have any knowledge whatsoever (neither in- 
tuition nor concept), noumena in this purely negative sense 
must indeed be admitted. For this is no more than saying 
that our kind of intuition does not extend to all things, but 

B 343 only to objects of our senses, that consequently its objective 
validity is limited, and that a place therefore remains open 
for some other kind of intuition, and so for things as its 
objects. But in that case the concept of a noumenon is problem- 
atic, that is, it is the representation of a thing of which we 

A 287 can neither say that it is possible nor that it is impossible; for 
we are acquainted with no kind of intuition but our own 
sensible kind and no kind of concepts but the categories, and 
neither of these is appropriate to a non-sensible object. We 
cannot, therefore, positively extend the sphere of the objects 
of our thought beyond the conditions of our sensibility, and 
assume besides appearances objects of pure thought, that is, 

1 [Altered by Kant (Nachtrdge, cl) to : "are known by us".] 



CONCEPTS OF REFLECTION 293 

noumena, since such objects have no assignable positive 
meaning. For in regard to the categories we must admit that 
they are not of themselves adequate to the knowledge of 
things in themselves, and that without the data of sensibility 
they would be merely subjective forms of the unity of under- 
standing, having no object. Thought is in itself, indeed, no 
product of the senses, and in so far is also not limited by 
them; but it does not therefore at once follow that it has a 
pure employment of its own, unaided by sensibility, since it is 
then without an object. We cannot call the noumenon such 
an object\ signifying, as it does, the problematic concept of 
an object for a quite different intuition and a quite different B 344 
understanding from ours, it is itself a problem. The concept 
of the noumenon is, therefore, not the concept of an object, 
but is a problem unavoidably bound up with the limitation 
of our sensibility the problem, namely, as to whether there 
may not be objects entirely disengaged from any such kind 
of intuition. This is a question which can only be answered A 288 
in an indeterminate manner, by saying that as sensible in- 
tuiiion does not extend to all things without distinction, a 
place remains open for other and different objects; and con- 
sequently that these latter must not be absolutely denied, 
though since we are without a determinate concept of them 
(inasmuch as no category can serve that purpose) neither 
can they be asserted as objects for our understanding. 

Understanding accordingly limits sensibility, but does 
not thereby extend its own sphere. In the process of warning 
the latter that it must not presume to claim applicability to 
things-in-themselves but only to appearances, it does indeed 
think for itself an object in itself, but only as transcendental 
object, which is the cause of appearance and therefore not 
itself appearance, and which can be thought neither as quan- 
tity nor as reality nor as substance, etc. (because these concepts 
always require sensible forms in which they determine an 
object). We are completely ignorant whether it is to be met 
with in us or outside us, whether it would be at once removed 
with the cessation of sensibility, or whether in the absence of B 345 
sensibility it would still remain. If we are pleased to name 
this object noumenon for the reason that its representation 
is not sensible, we are free to do so. But since we can apply 



294 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

to it none l of the concepts of our understanding, the repre- 
sentation remains for us empty, and is of no service except 

A 289 to mark the limits of our sensible knowledge and to leave 
open a space which we can fill neither through possible ex- 
perience nor through pure understanding. 

The critique of this pure understanding, accordingly, 
does not permit us to create a new field of objects beyond those 
which may be presented to it as appearances, and so to stray 
into intelligible worlds; nay, it does not allow of our entertain- 
ing even the concept of them. The error, which quite obvi- 
ously is the cause of this mistaken venture, and which indeed 
excuses though it does not justify it, lies in employing the 
understanding, contrary to its vocation, transcendentally, and 
in making objects, that is, possible intuitions, conform to con- 
cepts, not concepts to possible intuitions, on which alone their 
objective validity rests. This error, in turn, is due to the fact 
that apperception, and with it thought, precedes all possible 
determinate ordering of representations. Consequently what 
we do is to think something in general; and while on the one 

B 346 hand we determine it in sensible fashion, on the other hand, we 
distinguish from this mode of intuiting it the universal object 
represented in abstracto. What we are then left with is a mode 
of determining the object by thought alone a merely logical 
form without content, but which yet seems to us to be a 
mode in which the object exists in itself (noumenon) without 
regard to intuition, which is limited to our senses. 



A 290 Before we leave the Transcendental Analytic we must 
add some remarks which, although in themselves not of 
special importance, might nevertheless be regarded as re- 
quisite for the completeness of the system. The supreme 
concept with which it is customary to begin a transcendental 
philosophy is the division into the possible and the impossible. 
But since all division presupposes a concept to be divided, a 
still higher one is required, and this is the concept of an object 
in general, taken problematically, without its having been 
decided whether it is something or nothing. As the categories 
are the only concepts which refer to objects in general, the 

1 [Reading, with Erdmann, keinen for keine.] 



CONCEPTS OF REFLECTION 295 

distinguishing of an object, whether it is something or 
nothing, will proceed according to the order and under the 
guidance of the categories. 

1 . To the concepts of all, many, and one there is opposed B 347 
the concept which cancels everything, that is, none. Thus the 
object of a concept to which no assignable intuition whatso- 
ever corresponds is = nothing. That is, it is a concept without 

an object (ens rationis), like noumena, which cannot be 
reckoned among the possibilities, although they must not for 
that reason be declared to be also impossible; or like certain 
new fundamental forces, which though entertained in thought A 291 
without self-contradiction are yet also in our thinking un- 
supported by any example from experience, and are therefore 
not to be counted as possible. 

2. Reality is something] negation is nothing, namely, a 
concept of the absence of an object, such as shadow, cold 
(nihil privativum) . 

3. The mere form of intuition, without substance, is in 
itself no object, but the merely formal condition of an object 
(a$, appearance), as pure space and pure time (ens imagina- 
rium). These are indeed something, as forms of intuition, 
but are not themselves objects which are intuited. 

4. The object of a concept which contradicts itself is B 348 
nothing, because the concept is nothing, is the impossible, 

e.g. a two-sided rectilinear figure (nihil negativum). 

The table of this division of the concept of nothing would 
therefore have to be drawn up as follows. (The corresponding 
division of something follows directly from it): 

Nothing, A 292 

as 

I 

Empty concept without object, 
ens rationis. 

2 3 

Empty object of a concept, Empty intuition without object, 
nihil privativum. ens imaginarium. 

4 

Empty object without concept, 
nihil negativum. 



296 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

We see that the ens rationis 1 (i) is distinguished from the 
nihil negativum 2 (4), in that the former is not to be counted 
among possibilities because it is mere fiction (although not 
self-contradictory), whereas the latter is opposed to possi- 
B 349 bility in that the concept cancels itself. Both, however, are 
empty concepts. On the other hand, the nihil privativum (2) 
and the ens imaginarium (3) are empty data for concepts. If 
light were not given to the senses we could not represent dark- 
ness, and if extended beings were not perceived we could not 
represent space. Negation and the mere form of intuition, in 
the absence of a something real, are not objects. 

1 \Gedankending .] a \Undinge ] 



TRANSCENDENTAL LOGIC A 293 

SECOND DIVISION 

TRANSCENDENTAL DIALECTIC 
INTRODUCTION 

I 

TRANSCENDENTAL ILLUSION 

WE have already entitled dialectic in general a logic of illu- 
sion* This does not mean a doctrine of probability; for prob- 
ability is truth, known however on insufficient grounds, and 
the knowledge of which, though thus imperfect, is not on that 
account deceptive; and such doctrine, accordingly, is not to be 
separated from the analytic part of logic. Still less justification 
have we for regarding appearance and illusion as being identi- B 350 
cal. For truth or illusion is not in the object, in so far as it is 
intuited, but in the judgment about it, in so far as it is thought. 
It is therefore correct to say that the senses do not err not 
because they always judge rightly but because they do not 
judge at all. Truth and error, therefore, and consequently also 
illusion as leading to error, are only to be found in the judg- 
ment, i.e. only in the relation of the object to our understand- 
ing. In any knowledge which completely accords with the laws 
of understanding there is no error. In a representation of the A 294 
senses as containing no judgment whatsoever there is also 
no error. No natural force can of itself deviate from its own 
laws. Thus neither the understanding by itself (uninfluenced 
by another cause), nor the senses by themselves, would fall 
into error. The former would not, since, if it acts only accord- 
ing to its own laws, the effect (the judgment) must necessarily 
be in conformity with these laws; conformity with the laws 

1 [Scheinl 
297 



298 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

of the understanding is the formal element in all truth. In 
the senses there is no judgment whatsoever, neither a true 
nor a false judgment. Now since we have no source of know- 
ledge besides these two, it follows that error is brought about 
solely by the unobserved influence of sensibility on the under- 
standing, through which it happens that the subjective grounds 

B 351 of the judgment enter into union with the objective grounds 
and make these latter deviate from their true function," just 
as a body in motion would always of itself continue in a 
straight line in the same direction, but if influenced by another 
force acting in another direction starts off into curvilinear 

A 295 motion. In order to distinguish the specific action of under- 
standing from the force which is intermixed with it, it is neces- 
sary to regard the erroneous judgment as the diagonal between 
two forces forces which determine the judgment in different 
directions that enclose, as it were, an angle and to resolve 
this composite action into the simple actions of the under- 
standing and of the sensibility. In the case of pure a priori 
judgments this is a task which falls to be discharged by tran- 
scendental reflection, through which, as we have already shown, 
every representation is assigned its place in the corresponding 
faculty of knowledge, and by which the influence of the one 
upon the other is therefore likewise distinguished. 

We are not here concerned with empirical (e.g. optical) 

B 352 illusion, which occurs in the empirical employment of rules of 
understanding that are otherwise correct, and through which 
the faculty of judgment is misled by the influence of imagina- 
tion; we are concerned only with transcendental illusion^ which 
exerts its influence on principles that are in no wise intended for 
use in experience, in which case we should at least have had a 
criterion of their correctness. In defiance of all the warnings of 
criticism, it carries us altogether beyond the empirical employ- 
ment of categories and puts us off with a merely deceptive exten- 
sion of pure understanding. We shall entitle the principles whose 
application is confined entirely within the limits of possible 

B 351 a Sensibility, when subordinated to understanding, as the object 
upon which the latter exercises its function, is the" source of real 
modes of knowledge. But the same sensibility, in so far as it in- 
fluences the operation of understanding, and determines it to make 
judgments, is the ground of error. 



TRANSCENDENTAL DIALECTIC 299 

experience, immanent; and those, on the other hand, which A 296 
profess to pass beyond these limits, transcendent. In the case of 
these latter, I am not referring to the transcendental employ- 
ment or misemployment of the categories, which is merely an 
error of the faculty of judgment when it is not duly curbed by 
criticism, and therefore does not pay sufficient attention to the 
bounds of the territory within which alone free play is allowed 
to pure understanding. I mean actual principles which incite 
us to tear down all those boundary-fences and to seize posses- 
sion of an entirely new domain which recognises no limits of 
demarcation. Thus transcendental and transcendent are not 
interchangeable terms. The principles of pure understanding, 
which we have set out above, allow only of empirical and not 
of transcendental employment, that is, employment extend- B 353 
ing beyond the limits of experience. A principle, on the other 
hand, which takes away these limits, or even commands us 
actually to transgress them, is called transcendent. If our 
criticism can succeed in disclosing the illusion in these alleged 
principles, then those principles which are of merely empirical 
employment may be called, in opposition to the others, im- 
manent principles of pure understanding. 

Logical illusion, which consists in the mere imitation 
of the form of reason (the illusion of formal fallacies), arises 
entirely from lack of attention to the logical rule. As soon 
as attention is brought to bear on the case that is before us, A 297 
the illusion completely disappears. Transcendental illusion, 
on the other hand, does not cease even after it has been de- 
tected and its invalidity clearly revealed by transcendental 
criticism (e.g. the illusion in the proposition: the world must 
have a beginning in time). The cause of this is that there are 
fundamental rules and maxims for the employment of our 
reason (subjectively regarded as a faculty of human know- 
ledge), and that these have all the appearance of being ob- 
jective principles. We therefore take the subjective necessity 
of a connection of our concepts, which is to the advantage of 
the understanding, for an objective necessity in the deter- 
mination of things in themselves. This is an illusion which 
can no more be prevented than we can prevent the sea B 354 
appearing higher at the horizon than at the shore, since we see 
it through higher light rays; or to cite a still better example, 



300 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

than the astronomer can prevent the moon from appearing 
larger at its rising, although he is not deceived by this illusion. 
The transcendental dialectic will therefore content itself 
with exposing the illusion of transcendent judgments, and at 
the same time taking precautions that we be not deceived by 
it. That the illusion should, like logical illusion, actually dis- 
appear and cease to be an illusion, is something which tran- 

A 298 scendental dialectic can never be in a position to achieve. For 
here we have to do with a natural and inevitable illusion, 
which rests on subjective principles, and foists them upon us 
as objective; whereas logical dialectic in its exposure of de- 
ceptive inferences has to do merely with an error in the fol- 
lowing out of principles, or with an illusion artificially created 
in imitation of such inferences. There exists, then, a natural 
and unavoidable dialectic of pure reason not one in which a 
bungler might entangle himself through lack of knowledge, 
or one which some sophist has artificially invented to confuse 
thinking people, but one inseparable from human reason, and 
which, even after its deceptiveness has been exposed, will not 

B 355 cease to play tricks with reason and continually entrap it jnto 
momentary aberrations ever and again calling for correction. 



II 

PURE REASON AS THE SEAT OF TRANSCENDENTAL 
ILLUSION 

A 
Reason in general 

All our knowledge starts with the senses, proceeds from 
thence to understanding, and ends with reason, beyond which 
there is no higher faculty to be found in us for elaborating the 
matter of intuition and bringing it under the highest unity of 
A 299 thought. Now that I have to give an explanation of this highest 
faculty of knowledge, I find myself in some difficulty. Reason, 
like understanding, can be employed in a merely formal, that 
is, logical manner, wherein it abstracts from all content of 
knowledge. But it is also capable of a real use, since it contains 
within itself the source of certain concepts and principles, 



TRANSCENDENTAL DIALECTIC 301 

which it does not borrow either from the senses or from the 
understanding. The former faculty has long since been defined 
by logicians as the faculty of making mediate inferences (in dis- 
tinction from immediate inferences, consequentiis immediatis)\ 
but the nature of the other faculty, which itself gives birth to con- 
cepts, is not to be understood from this definition. Now since 
we are here presented with a division of reason into a logical 
and a transcendental faculty, we are constrained to seek for a B 356 
higher concept of this source of knowledge which includes 
both concepts as subordinate to itself. Following the analogy 
of concepts of understanding, we may expect that the logical 
concept will provide the key to the transcendental, and that 
the table of the functions of the former will at once give us the 
genealogical tree of the concepts of reason. 

In the first part of our transcendental logic we treated the 
understanding as being the faculty of rules; reason we shall 
here distinguish from understanding by entitling it the faculty 
of principles. 

The term 'principle' is ambiguous, and commonly sig- A 300 
nifies any knowledge which can be used as a principle, 
although in itself, and as regards its proper origin, it is no 
principle. Every universal proposition, even one derived from 
experience, through induction, can serve as major premiss in 
a syllogism; but it is not therefore itself a principle. The 
mathematical axioms (e.g. that there can only be one straight 
line between two points) are instances of universal a priori 
knowledge, and are therefore rightly called principles, rela- 
tively to the cases which can be subsumed under them. But I 
cannot therefore say that I apprehend this property of straight 
lines in general and in itself, from principles; I apprehend it B 357 
only in pure intuition. 

Knowledge from principles is, therefore, that knowledge 
alone in which I apprehend the particular in the universal 
through concepts. Thus every syllogism is a mode of deducing 
knowledge from a principle. For the major premiss always 
gives a concept through which everything that is subsumed 
under the concept as under a condition is known from the con- 
cept according to a principle. Now since any universal know- 
ledge can serve as major premiss in a syllogism, and since the 
understanding presents us with universal a priori propositions 



302 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

of this kind, they can also be called principles in respect of 
their possible employment. 

A 301 But if we consider them in themselves in relation to their 
origin, these fundamental propositions of pure understanding 
are anything rather than knowledge based on concepts. For 
they would not even be possible a priori, if we were not sup- 
ported by pure intuition (in mathematics), or by conditions of 
a possible experience in general. That everything that happens 
has a cause cannot be inferred merely from the concept of 
happening in general; on the contrary, it is this fundamental 
proposition which shows how in regard to that which happens 
we are in a position to obtain in experience any concept what- 
soever that is really determinate. 

The understanding can, then, never supply any synthetic 
modes of knowledge derived from concepts; and it is such 

B 358 modes of knowledge that are properly, without qualification, 1 
to be entitled 'principles'. All universal propositions, however, 
may be spoken of as 'principles' in a comparative sense. 

It has long been wished and sometime perhaps (who 
knows when!) may be fulfilled that instead of the endless 
multiplicity of civil laws we should be able to fall back on tlieir 
general principles. For it is in these alone that we can hope to 
find the secret of what we are wont to call the simplifying of 
legislation. In this domain, however, the laws are only limita- 
tions imposed upon our freedom in order that such freedom 
may completely harmonise with itself; hence they are directed 
to something which is entirely our own work, and of which we 
ourselves, through these concepts, can be the cause. But that 

A 302 objects in themselves, the very nature of things, should stand 
under principles, and should be determined according to mere 
concepts, is a demand which, if not impossible, is at least quite 
contrary to common sense. 2 But however that may be (it is 
a question which we still have to discuss), it is now at least 
evident that knowledge derived from principles which are 
genuinely such is something quite different from knowledge 
obtained merely through the understanding. The latter may, 
indeed, also take the form of a principle and thus be prior to 
some other knowledge, but in itself, in so far as it is syn- 

1 [schkrhthin.] 
2 \sehr Wider -sinntsc he s.] 



TRANSCENDENTAL DIALECTIC 303 

thetic, it does not depend on thought alone, nor contain in 
itself a universal obtained from concepts. 

Understanding may be regarded as a faculty which secures B 359 
the unity of appearances by means of rules, and reason as 
being the faculty which secures the unity of the rules of under- 
standing under principles. Accordingly, reason never applies 
itself directly to experience or to any object, but to understand- 
ing, in order to give to the manifold knowledge of the latter 
an a priori unity by means of concepts, a unity which may be 
called the unity of reason, and which is quite different in kind 
from any unity that can be accomplished by the understanding. 

This is the universal concept of the faculty of reason in so 
far as it has been possible to make it clear in the total absence 
of examples. These will be given in the course of our argu- 
ment. 

B A 303 

The Logical Employment of Reason 

A distinction is commonly made between what is immediately 
known and what is merely inferred. That in a figure which is 
bounded by three straight lines there are three angles, is known 
immediately; but that the sum of these angles is equal to two right 
angles, is merely inferred. Since we have constantly to make 
use of inference, and so end by becoming completely accus- 
tomed to it, we no longer take notice of this distinction, and 
frequently, as in the so-called deceptions of the senses, treat as 
being immediately perceived what has really only been inferred . 
In every process of reasoning there is a fundamental proposi- B 3 6 
tion, and 1 another, namely the conclusion, which is drawn 
from it, and 1 finally, the inference (logical sequence 2 ) by which 
the truth of the latter is inseparably connected with the truth 
of the former. If the inferred judgment is already so contained 
in the earlier judgment that it may be derived from it without- 
the mediation of a third representation, the inference is called 
immediate (consequentia immediata) I should prefer to entitle 
it inference of the understanding. But if besides the know- 
ledge contained in the primary proposition still another judg- 

1 [und added in 2nd edition.] 
2 [Konsequenz.] 



304 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

ment is needed to yield the conclusion, it is to be entitled an 
inference of the reason. 1 In the proposition : "All men are 
mortal", there are already contained the propositions : "some 
men are mortal", "some mortal beings are men", "nothing 

A 304 that is not mortal is a man"; and these are therefore immediate 
conclusions from it. On the other hand, the proposition: "All 
learned beings are mortal", is not contained in the funda- 
mental judgment (for the concept of learned beings does not 
occur in it at all), and it can only be inferred from it by means 
of a mediating judgment. 

In every syllogism I first think a rule (the major premiss) 
through the understanding. Secondly, I subsume something 
known under the condition of the rule by means of judgment* 
(the minor premiss). Finally, what is thereby known I deter - 

B 361 mine through the predicate of the rule, and so a priori through 
reason (the conclusion). The relation, therefore, which the 
major premiss, as the rule, represents between what is known 
and its condition is the ground of the different kinds of syllo- 
gism. Consequently, syllogisms, like judgments, are of three 
kinds, according to the different ways in which, in the under- 
standing, they express the relation of what is known 3 ; fhey 
are either categorical ', hypothetical \ or disjunctive. 

If, as generally happens, the judgment that forms the con- 
clusion is set as a problem to see whether it does not follow 
from judgments already given, and through which a quite 
different object is thought I look in the understanding for the 
assertion of this conclusion, to discover whether it is not there 
found to stand under certain conditions according to a uni- 

A 305 versal rule. If I find such a condition, and if the object of the 
conclusion can be subsumed under the given condition, then 
the conclusion is deduced from the rule, which is also valid for 
other objects of knowledge. From this we see that in inference 
reason endeavours to reduce the varied and manifold know- 
ledge obtained through the understanding to the smallest 
number of principles (universal conditions) and thereby to 
achieve in it the highest possible unity. 

1 [Vernunftschluss, here distinguished from Verstandessehluss, is Kant's 
usual term for 'syllogism', and is so translated in other passages as, ."., in the 
next paragraph.] 

2 [Urteilskraft.] 3 [des Erkenntnisses.] 



TRANSCENDENTAL DIALECTIC 305 

C 3362 

The Pure Employment of Reason 

Can we isolate reason, and is it, so regarded, an independ- 
ent source of concepts and judgments which spring from it 
alone, and by means of which it relates to objects; or is it a 
merely subordinate faculty, for imposing on given modes of 
knowledge a certain form, called logical a faculty through 
which what is known by means of the understanding is deter- 
mined in its interrelations, lower rules being brought under 
higher (namely, those the condition of which includes in its 
own sphere the condition of the lower), as far as this can be 
done through [processes of] comparison? This is the question 
with which we are now provisionally occupying ourselves. As 
a matter of fact, multiplicity of rules and unity of principles is a 
demand of reason, for the purpose of bringing the understand- 
ing into thoroughgoing accordance with itself, just as the 
understanding brings the manifold of intuition under concepts A 306 
and thereby connects the manifold. 1 But such a principle does 
not prescribe any law for objects, and does not contain any 
general ground of the possibility of knowing or of determining 
objects as such; it is merely a subjective law for the orderly 
management of the possessions of our understanding, that by 
comparison of its concepts it may reduce them to the smallest 
possible number; it does not justify us in demanding from the 
objects such uniformity as will minister to the convenience B 363 
and extension of our understanding; and we may not, there- 
fore, ascribe to the maxim any objective validity. In a word, 
the question is, does reason in itself, that is, does pure reason, 
contain a priori synthetic principles and rules, and in what 
may these principles consist? 

The formal and logical procedure of reason in syllogisms 
gives us sufficient guidance as to the ground on which the 
transcendental principle of pure reason in its synthetic know- 
ledge will rest. 

In the first place, reason in the syllogism does not concern 
itself with intuitions, with a view to bringing them under rules 
(as the understanding does with its categories), but with con- 

1 [Reading, with Erdmann, /*** forjene.] 

X 



306 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

cepts and judgments. Accordingly, even if pure reason does 
concern itself with objects, it has no immediate relation to 

A 307 these and the intuition of them, but only to the understand- 
ing and its judgments which deal at first hand with the senses 
and their intuition for the purpose of determining their object. 
The unity of reason is therefore not the unity of a possible 
experience, but is essentially different from such unity, which 
is that of understanding. That everything which happens has 
a cause, is not a principle known and prescribed by reason. 
That principle makes the unity of experience possible, and 

6364 borrows nothing from reason, which, apart from this relation 
to possible experience, could never, from mere concepts, have 
imposed any such synthetic unity. 

Secondly, reason, in its logical employment, seeks to dis- 
cover the universal condition of its judgment (the conclusion), 
and the syllogism is itself nothing but a judgment made by 
means of the subsumption of its condition under a universal 
rule (the major premiss). Now since this rule is itself subject 
to the same requirement of reason, and the condition of the con- 
dition must therefore be sought (by means of a prosyllogism) 
whenever practicable, obviously the principle peculiar to reason 
in general, in its logical employment, is: to find for the con- 
ditioned knowledge obtained through the understanding the 
unconditioned whereby its unity is brought to completion. 

But this logical maxim can only become a principle of 
pure reason through our assuming that if the conditioned is 

A 308 given, the whole series of conditions, subordinated to one 
another a series which is therefore itself unconditioned 
is likewise given, that is, is contained in the object and its 
connection. 

Such a principle of pure reason is obviously synthetic, 
the conditioned is analytically related to some condition but 
not to the unconditioned. From the principle there must also 
follow various synthetic propositions, of which pure under- 

3365 standing inasmuch as it has to deal only with objects of a 
possible experience, the knowledge and synthesis of which is 
always conditioned knows nothing. The unconditioned, if its 
actuality be granted, is 1 especially to be considered in respect 
of all the determinations which distinguish it from whatever 

1 [Reading, with 4th edition, wird for kann.} 



TRANSCENDENTAL DIALECTIC 307 

is conditioned, and thereby must yield material for many 
synthetic a priori propositions. 

The principles 1 arising from this supreme principle 2 of 
pure reason will, however, be transcendent in relation to all 
appearances, i.e. there can never be any adequate empirical 
employment of the principle. It will therefore be entirely 
different from all principles of understanding, the employment 
of which is wholly immanent, inasmuch as they have as their 
theme 3 only the possibility of experience. Take the principle, 
that the series of conditions (whether in the synthesis of 
appearances, or even in the thinking of things in general) 
extends to the unconditioned. Does it, or does it not, have 
objective applicability? What are its implications as regards 
the empirical employment of understanding? Or is there A 309 
no such objectively valid principle of reason, but only 
a logical precept, to advance towards completeness by an 
ascent to ever higher conditions and so to give to our know- 
ledge the greatest possible unity of reason? Can it be that 
this requirement of reason has been wrongly treated in being 
viewed as a transcendental principle of pure reason, and that B 366 
we have been overhasty in postulating such an unbounded 
completeness of the series of conditions in the objects them- 
selves? In that case, what other misunderstandings and de- 
lusions may have crept into the syllogisms, whose major pre- 
miss (perhaps rather an assumption than a postulate) is 
derived from pure reason, and which proceed from experience 
upwards to its conditions? To answer these questions will be 
our task in the Transcendental Dialectic, which we shall now 
endeavour to develop from its deeply concealed sources in 
human reason. We shall divide the Dialectic into two chapters, 
the first on the transcendent concepts of pure reason, the 
second on its transcendent and dialectical syllogisms. 

1 [Grundsdtze.] 8 [Pnnztp.] 3 [zu ihrem Thema.] 



A 3 io THE TRANSCENDENTAL DIALECTIC 

BOOK I 

THE CONCEPTS OF PURE REASON 

WHATEVER we may have to decide as to the possibility of 
the concepts derived from pure reason, it is at least true that 
they are not to be obtained by mere reflection but only by 
inference. Concepts of understanding are also thought a 

B 367 priori antecedently to experience and for the sake of experi- 
ence, but they contain nothing more than the unity of reflec- 
tion upon appearances, in so far as these appearances must 
necessarily belong to a possible empirical consciousness. 
Through them alone is knowledge and the determination of 
an object possible. They first provide the material required 
for making inferences, and they are not preceded by any 
a priori concepts of objects from which they could be inferred. 
On the other hand, their objective reality is founded solely 
on the fact that, since they constitute the intellectual form of 
all experience, it must always be possible to show their appli- 
cation in experience. 

The title 'concept of reason' already gives a preliminary 
indication that we are dealing with something which does 
not allow of being confined within experience, since it con- 
cerns a knowledge of which any empirical knowledge (perhaps 

A 31 1 even the whole of possible experience or of its empirical syn- 
thesis) is only a part. No actual experience has ever been com- 
pletely adequate to it, yet to it every actual experience belongs. 
Concepts of reason enable us to conceive^ concepts of under- 
standing to understand ([as employed in reference to] percep- 
tions). If the concepts of reason contain the unconditioned, they 
are concerned with something to which all experience is subor- 

308 



IDEAS IN GENERAL 309 

dinate, but which is never itself an object of experience 
something to which reason leads in its inferences from experi- 
ence, and in accordance with which it estimates and gauges 
the degree of its empirical employment, but which is never 
itself a member of the empirical synthesis. If, none the less, B 368 
these concepts possess objective validity, they may be called 
conceptus ratiocinati (rightly inferred concepts); if, however, 
they have no such validity, they have surreptitiously obtained 
recognition through having at least an illusory appearance 
of being inferences, and may be called conceptus ratiocinantes 
(pseudo-rational concepts). But since this can be established 
only in the chapter on the dialectical inferences of pure reason, 
we are not yet in a position to deal with it. Meantime, just as 
we have entitled the pure concepts of understanding cate- 
gories, so we shall give a new name to the concepts of pure 
reason, calling them transcendental ideas. This title we shall 
now explain and justify. 



FIRST BOOK OF THE TRANSCENDENTAL A 312 

DIALECTIC 

Section I 
THE IDEAS IN GENERAL 

Despite the great wealth of our languages, the thinker often 
finds himself at a loss for the expression which exactly fits his 
concept, and for want of which he is unable to be really intel- 
ligible to others or even to himself. To coin new words is to ad- B 369 
vance a claim to legislation in language that seldom succeeds; 
and before we have recourse to this desperate expedient it is 
advisable to look about in a dead and learned language, to see 
whether the concept and its appropriate expression are not 
already there provided. Even if the old-time usage of a term 
should have become somewhat uncertain through the careless- 
ness of those who introduced it, it is always better to hold fast 
to the meaning which distinctively belongs to it (even though 
it remain doubtful whether it was originally used in precisely 
this sense) than to defeat our purpose by making ourselves 
unintelligible. 



310 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

For this reason, if there be only a single word the estab- 
lished meaning of which exactly agrees with a certain concept, 

A 313 then, since it is of great importance that this concept be dis- 
tinguished from related concepts, it is advisable to economise 
in the use of the word and not to employ it, merely for the sake of 
variety, as a synonym for some other expression, but carefully 
to keep to its own proper meaning. Otherwise it may easily 
happen that the expression ceasing to engage the attention in 
one specific sense, and being lost in the multitude of other 
words of very different meaning, the thought also is lost which 
it alone could have preserved. 

B 370 Plato made use of the expression 'idea' in such a way as 
quite evidently to have meant by it something which not only can 
never be borrowed from the senses but far surpasses even the 
concepts of understanding (with which Aristotle occupied him- 
self), inasmuch as in experience nothing is ever to be met with 
that is coincident with it. 1 For Plato ideas are archetypes 
of the things themselves, and not, in the manner of the cate- 
gories, merely keys to possible experiences. In his view they 
have issued from highest reason, and from that source have 
come to be shared in by human reason, which, however, is now 
no longer in its original state, but is constrained laboriously to 
recall, by a process of reminiscence (which is named philo- 
sophy), the old ideas, now very much obscured. I shall not 
engage here in any literary enquiry into the meaning which 

A 314 this illustrious philosopher attached to the expression. I need 
only remark that it is by no means unusual, upon comparing 
the thoughts which an author has expressed in regard to his 
subject, whether in ordinary conversation or in writing, to find 
that we understand him better than he has understood himself. 
As he has not sufficiently determined his concept, he has some- 
times spoken, or even thought, in opposition to his own in- 
tention. 

Plato very well realised that our faculty of knowledge feels 
a much higher need than merely to spell out appearances ac- 

B 371 cording to a synthetic unity, in order to be able to read them 
as experience. He knew that our reason naturally exalts itself 
to forms of knowledge which so far transcend the bounds of 
experience that no given empirical object can ever coincide 2 

1 \damit Kongruicrendes.} 2 \kongr -uteren.] 



IDEAS IN GENERAL 311 

with them, but which must none the less be recognised as 
having their own reality, and which are by no means mere 
fictions of the brain. 

Plato found the chief instances of his ideas in the field of 
the practical/ that is, in what rests upon freedom, which in its 
turn rests upon modes of knowledge that are a peculiar product A 315 
of reason. Whoever would derive the concepts of virtue from 
experience and make (as many have actually done) what at best 
can only serve as an example in an imperfect kind of exposi- 
tion, into a pattern from which to derive knowledge, would 
make of virtue something which changes according to time 
and circumstance, an ambiguous monstrosity not admitting of 
the formation of any rule. On the contrary, as we are well 
aware, if anyone is held up as a pattern of virtue, the true B 372 
original with which we compare the alleged pattern and by 
which alone we judge of its value is to be found only in our 
minds. This original is the idea of virtue, in respect of which 
the possible objects of experience may serve as examples 
(proofs that what the concept of reason commands is in a cer- 
tain degree practicable), but not as archetype. That no one 
of us will ever act in a way which is adequate to what is con- 
tained in the pure idea of virtue is far from proving this thought 
to be in any respect chimerical. For it is only by means of this 
idea that any judgment as to moral worth or its opposite is 
possible; and it therefore serves as an indispensable founda- 
tion for every approach to moral perfection however the 
obstacles in human nature, to the degree of which there are no 
assignable limits, may keep us far removed from its complete, 
achievement. 

The Republic of Plato has become proverbial as a striking A 316 
example of a supposedly visionary perfection, such as can exist 

He also, indeed, extended his concept so as to cover specu- 
lative knowledge, provided only the latter was pure and given com- 
pletely a priori. He even extended it to mathematics, although the 
object of that science is to be found nowhere except in possible ex- 
perience. In this I cannot follow him, any more than in his mystical 
deduction of these ideas, or in the extravagances whereby he, so to 
speak, hypostatised them although, as must be allowed, the exalted 
language, which he employed in this sphere, is quite capable of a 
milder interpretation that accords with the nature of things. 



312 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

only in the brain of the idle thinker; and Brucker 1 has ridiculed 
the philosopher for asserting that a prince can rule well only 
in so far as he participates in the ideas. We should, hpwever, 
be better advised to follow up this thought, and, where the 
great philosopher leaves us without help, to place it, through 
fresh efforts, in a proper light, rather than to set it aside as use- 

B 373 less on the very sorry and harmful pretext of impracticability. 
A constitution allowing the greatest possible human freedom in 
accordance with laws by which the freedom of each is made to 
be consistent with that of all others I do not speak of the 
greatest happiness, for this will follow of itself is at any rate 
a necessary idea, which must be taken as fundamental not only 
in first projecting a constitution but in all its laws. For at the 
start we are required to abstract from the actually existing 
hindrances, which, it may be, do not arise unavoidably out 
of human nature, but rather are due to a quite remediable 
cause, the neglect of the pure ideas in the making of the laws. 
Nothing, indeed, can be more injurious, or more unworthy of 
a philosopher, than the vulgar appeal to so-called adverse ex- 
perience. Such experience would never have existed at all, if 

A 317 at the proper time those institutions had been established' in 
accordance with ideas, and if ideas had not been displaced by 
crude conceptions which, just because they have been derived 
from experience, have nullified all good intentions. The more 
legislation and government are brought into harmony with the 
above idea, the rarer would punishments become, and it is there- 
fore quite rational to maintain, as Plato does, that in a perfect 
state no punishments whatsoever would be required. This per- 
fect state may never, indeed, come into being; none the less 

B 374 this does not affect the rightfulness of the idea, which, in order 
to bring the legal organisation of mankind ever nearer to its 
greatest possible perfection, advances this maximum as an 
archetype. For what the highest degree may be at which 
mankind may have to come to a stand, and how great a gulf 
may still have to be left between the idea and its realisation, 
are questions which no one can, or ought to, answer. For the 
issue depends on freedom; and it is in the power of freedom 
to pass beyond any and every specified limit. 

1 [Johann Jakob Brucker (1696-1770). The reference is probably to vol. i, 
pp. 726-7 of his Historia Critica Philosophica (pub. 1742-4).] 



IDEAS IN GENERAL 313 

But it is not only where human reason exhibits genuine 
causality, and where ideas are operative causes (of actions and 
their objects), namely, in the moral sphere, but also in regard 
to nature itself, that Plato rightly discerns clear proofs of an 
origin from ideas. A plant, an animal, the orderly arrangement 
of the cosmos presumably therefore the entire natural world 
clearly show that they are possible only according to ideas, A 318 
and that though no single creature in the conditions of its 
individual existence coincides with the idea of what is most 
perfect in its kind just as little as does any human being 
with the idea of humanity, which he yet carries in his soul 
as the archetype of his actions these ideas are none the 
less completely determined in the Supreme Understanding, 
each as an individual and each as unchangeable, and are 
the original causes of things. But only the totality of things, 
in their interconnection as constituting the universe, is com- B 375 
pletely adequate to the idea. If we set aside the exaggera- 
tions in Plato's methods of expression, the philosopher's 
spiritual flight from the ectypal mode of reflecting upon 1 the 
physical world-order to the architectonic ordering of it ac- 
cording to ends, that is, according to ideas, is an enterprise 
which calls for respect and imitation. It is, however, in regard 
to the principles of morality, legislation, and religion, where 
the experience, in this case of the good, is itself made possible 
only by the ideas incomplete as their empirical expression 
must always remain that Plato's teaching exhibits its quite 
peculiar merits. When it fails to obtain recognition, this is due 
to its having been judged in accordance with precisely those 
empirical rules, the invalidity of which, regarded as principles, 
it has itself demonstrated. For whereas, so far as nature is con- 
cerned, experience supplies the rules and is the source of 
truth, in respect of the moral laws it is, alas, the mother of 
illusion! Nothing is more reprehensible than to derive the laws A 319 
prescribing what ought to be done from what is done, or to 
impose upon them the limits by which the latter is circum- 
scribed. 

But though the following out of these considerations is 
what gives to philosophy its peculiar dignity, we must mean- 
time occupy ourselves with a less resplendent, but still meri- 

1 [von dcr copeilichen Betrachtung^\ 



3H KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

torious task, namely, to level the ground, and to render it 
B 376 sufficiently secure for moral edifices of these majestic dimen- 
sions. For this ground has been honeycombed by subterranean 
workings which reason, in its confident but fruitless search 
for hidden treasures, has carried out in all directions, and 
which threaten the security of the superstructures. Our present 
duty is to obtain insight into the transcendental employment 
of pure reason, its principles and ideas, that we may be in a 
position to determine and estimate its influence and true value. 
Yet, before closing these introductory remarks, I beseech 
those who have the interests of philosophy at heart (which is 
more than is the case with most people) that, if they find 
themselves convinced by these and the following considera- 
tions, they be careful to preserve the expression 'idea' in 
its original meaning, that it may not become one of those 
expressions which are commonly used to indicate any and 
every species of representation, in a happy-go-lucky confu- 
sion, to the consequent detriment of science. There is no lack 
of terms suitable for each kind of representation, that we 
A 320 should thus needlessly encroach upon the province of any one 
of them. Their serial arrangement 1 is as follows. The genus 
is representation* in general (repraesentatio). Subordinate to 
it stands representation with consciousness (perceptio). A 
perception* which relates solely to the subject as the modifica- 
tion of its state is sensation* (sensatio), an objective perception 
B 377 is knowledge^ (cognitid). This is either intuition* or concept 1 
(intuitus vel conceptus). The former relates immediately to the 
object and is single, the latter refers to it mediately by means 
of a feature which several things may have in common. The 
concept is either an empirical or a pure concept. The pure con- 
cept, in so far as it has its origin in the understanding alone 
(not in the pure image of sensibility), is called a notion? A 
concept formed from notions and transcending the possibility 
of experience is an idea 9 or concept of reason. Anyone who 
has familiarised himself with these distinctions must find it 
intolerable to hear the representation of the colour, red, called 
an idea. It ought not even to be called a concept of under- 
standing, a notion. 

1 [Stufenletter.] * [Vorstellung.] 3 [Perception.] * [Empfindung.] 
8 [Erkenntnis.] e [Ansc/iauung.] 7 [Begriff.] 8 [Notio.] ' [Idee.] 



THE TRANSCENDENTAL IDEAS 315 



FIRST BOOK OF THE TRANSCENDENTAL A 321 

DIALECTIC 

Section 2 
THE TRANSCENDENTAL IDEAS 

The Transcendental Analytic has shown us how the mere 
logical form of our knowledge may in itself contain original 
pure a priori concepts, which represent objects prior to all 
experience, or, speaking more correctly, indicate the synthetic 
unity which alone makes possible an empirical knowledge of B 378 
objects. The form of judgments (converted into a concept of 
the synthesis of intuitions) yielded categories which direct all 
employment of understanding in experience. Similarly, we 
may presume that the form of syllogisms, 1 when applied to 
the synthetic unity of intuitions under the direction of the 
categories, will contain the origin of special a priori concepts, 
which we may call pure concepts of reason, or transcendental 
ideas, and which will determine according to principles how 
understanding is to be employed in dealing with experience 
in its totality. 2 

The function of reason in its inferences consists 3 in the 
universality of knowledge [which it yields] according to con- 
cepts, the syllogism being itself a judgment which is deter- 
mined a priori in the whole extent of its conditions. The pro- A 322 
position, 'Caius is mortal', I could indeed derive from experi- 
ence by means of the understanding alone. But I am in pursuit 
of a concept (in this case, the concept 'man') that contains the 
condition under which the predicate (general term for what 
is asserted) of this judgment is given; and after I have sub- 
sumed the predicate under this condition taken in its whole 
extension ('All men are mortal'), I proceed, in accordance 
therewith, to determine the knowledge of my object ('Caius 
is mortal'). 

Accordingly, in the conclusion of a syllogism we restrict a 

1 [The reader will bear in mind that the German term here translated 
'syllogism' is Vernunflschluss.'] 

2 \im Ganzen der gesamten Erfahrung\. 

8 [Reading, with Adickes, besteht for bestand.} 



316 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

B 379 predicate to a certain object, after having first thought it in 
the major premiss in its whole extension under a given con- 
dition. This complete quantity of the extension in relation to 
such a condition is called universality (universalitas). In the 
synthesis of intuitions we have corresponding to this the allness 
(universitas) or totality of the conditions. The transcendental 
concept of reason is, therefore, none other than the concept of 
the totality of the conditions for any given conditioned. Now 
since it is the unconditioned alone which makes possible the 
totality of conditions, and, conversely, the totality of conditions 
is always itself unconditioned, a pure concept of reason can 
in general be explained by the concept of the unconditioned, 
conceived as containing a ground of the synthesis of the 
conditioned. 

A 323 The number of pure concepts of reason will be equal to the 
number of kinds of relation which the understanding repre- 
sents to itself by means of the categories. We have therefore 
to seek for an unconditioned r , first, of the categorical synthesis 
in a subject', secondly, of the hypothetical synthesis of the 
members of a series\ thirdly, of the disjunctive synthesis of the 
parts in a system. 

There is thus precisely the same number of kinds of syl- 
logism, each of which advances through prosyllogisms to the 
unconditioned: first, to the subject which is never itself a pre- 

B 380 dicate; secondly, to the presupposition which itself presup- 
poses nothing further; thirdly, to such an aggregate of the 
members of the division of a concept as requires nothing 
further to complete the division. The pure concepts of reason 
of totality in the synthesis of conditions are thus at least 
necessary as setting us the task of extending the unity of 
understanding, where possible, up to the unconditioned, and 
are grounded in the nature of human reason. These tran- 
scendental concepts may, however, be without any suitable 
corresponding employment in concrete, and may therefore 
have no other utility than that of so directing the understand- 
ing that, while it is extended to the uttermost, it is also at the 
same time brought into complete consistency with itself. 

A 324 But while we are here speaking of the totality of con- 
ditions and of the unconditioned, as being equivalent titles 
for all concepts of reason, we again come upon an expression 



THE TRANSCENDENTAL IDEAS 317 

with which we cannot dispense, and which yet, owing to an 
ambiguity that attaches to it through long-standing misuse, 
we also cannot with safety employ. The word 'absolute* is 
one of the few words which in their original meaning were 
adapted to a concept that no other word in the same language 
exactly suits. Consequently its loss, or what amounts to the 
same thing, looseness in its employment, must carry with it B 381 
the loss of the concept itself. And since, in this case, the con- 
cept is one to which reason devotes much of its attention, 
it cannot be relinquished without greatly harming all tran- 
scendental philosophy. The word 'absolute* is now often used 
merely to indicate that something is true of a thing considered 
in itself, and therefore of its inward nature. In this sense the 
absolutely possible would mean that which in itself (interne) 
is possible which is, in fact, the least that can be said of an 
object. On the other hand, the word is also sometimes used to 
indicate that something is valid in all respects, without limita- 
tion, e.g. absolute despotism, and in this sense the absolutely 
possible would mean what is in every relation (in all respects) 1 
possible which is the most that can be said of the possibility A 325 
of a thing. Now frequently we find these two meanings com- 
bined. For example, what is internally impossible is impossible 
in any relation, and therefore absolutely impossible. But in 
most cases the two meanings are infinitely far apart, and I can 
in nowise conclude that because something is in itself possible, 
it is therefore also possible in every relation, and so absolutely 
possible. Indeed, as I shall subsequently show, absolute neces- 
sity is by no means always dependent on inner necessity, and 
must not, therefore, be treated as synonymous with it. If the 
opposite of something is internally impossible, this opposite B 382 
is, of course, impossible in all respects, and the thing itself 
is therefore absolutely necessary. But I cannot reverse the 
reasoning so as to conclude that if something is absolutely 
necessary its opposite is internally impossible, i.e. that the 
absolute necessity of things is an inner necessity. For this 
inner necessity is in certain cases a quite empty expression 
to which we cannot attach any concept whatsoever, whereas 
the concept of the necessity of a thing in all relations (to every- 
thing possible) involves certain quite special determinations. 
1 [With Erdmann, bracketing in aller Absicht.] 



3 i8 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

Since the loss of a concept that is of great importance for 
speculative science can never be a matter of indifference to the 
philosopher, I trust that the fixing and careful preservation 
of the expression, on which the concept depends, will like- 
wise be not indifferent to him. 

A 326 It is, then, in this wider sense that I shall use the word 
l absolute\ opposing it to what is valid only comparatively, 
that is, in some particular respect. For while the latter is re- 
stricted by conditions, the former is valid without restriction. 
Now the transcendental concept of reason is directed 
always solely towards absolute totality in the synthesis of con- 
ditions, and never terminates save in what is absolutely, that is, 
in all relations, unconditioned. For pure reason leaves every- 

B 383 thing to the understanding the understanding [alone] apply- 
ing immediately to the objects of intuition, or rather to their 
synthesis in the imagination. Reason concerns itself exclusively 
with absolute totality in the employment of the concepts of the 
understanding, and endeavours to carry the synthetic unity, 
which is thought in the category, up to the completely uncon- 
ditioned. We may call this unity of appearances the unity of 
reason, and that expressed by the category the unity of under- 
standing. Reason accordingly occupies itself solely with the 
employment of understanding, not indeed in so far as the latter 
contains the ground of possible experience (for the concept of 
the absolute totality of conditions is not applicable in any 
experience, since no experience is unconditioned), but solely 
in order to prescribe to the understanding its direction to- 
wards a certain unity of which it has itself no concept, and 
in such manner as to unite all the acts of the understanding, 

A 327 in respect of every object, into an absolute whole. The object- 
ive employment of the pure concepts of reason is, therefore, 
always transcendent, while that of the pure concepts of under- 
standing must, in accordance with their nature, and inasmuch 
as their application is solely to possible experience, be always 
immanent. 

I understand by idea a necessary concept of reason to 
which no corresponding 1 object can be given in sense-ex- 
perience. 2 Thus the pure concepts of reason, now under con- 

B 384 sideration, are transcendental ideas. They are concepts of pure 

1 \kongruierender ^ 8 \in den Stnnen.] 



THE TRANSCENDENTAL IDEAS 319 

reason, in that they view all knowledge gained in experience as 
being determined through an absolute totality of conditions. 
They are not arbitrarily invented; they are imposed by the 
very nature of reason itself, and therefore stand in necessary 
relation to the whole employment of understanding. Finally, 
they are transcendent and overstep the limits of all experi- 
ence; no object adequate to the transcendental idea can ever be 
found within experience. If I speak of an idea, then as regards 
its object, viewed as an object of pure understanding, I am 
saying a great deal&gt; but as regards its relation to the subject, 
that is, in respect of its actuality under empirical conditions, 
I am for the same reason saying very little, in that, as being 
the concept of a maximum, it can never be correspondingly 
given in concrete. Since in the merely speculative employment 
of reason the latter [namely, to determine the actuality of the A 328 
idea under empirical conditions] is indeed our whole purpose, 
and since the approximation to a concept, which yet is never 
actually reached, puts us in no better position than if the con- 
cept were entirely abortive, we say of such a concept it is only 
an idea. The absolute whole of all appearances we might thus 
say is only an idea] since we can never represent it in image, 
it remains a. problem to which there is no solution. But since, 
on the other hand, in the practical employment of understand- 
ing, our sole concern is with the carrying out of rules, the idea B 385 
of practical reason can always be given actually in concreto, 
although only in part; it is, indeed, the indispensable condition 
of all practical employment of reason. The practice of it is al- 
ways limited and defective, but is not confined within determin- 
able boundaries, and is therefore always under the influence 
of the concept of an absolute completeness. The practical idea 
is, therefore, always in the highest degree fruitful, and in its 
relation to our actual activities is indispensably necessary. 
Reason is here, indeed, exercising causality, as actually 
bringing about that which its concept contains; and of such 
wisdom we cannot, therefore, say disparagingly it is only an 
idea. On the contrary, just because it is the idea of the neces- 
sary unity of all possible ends, it must as an original, and at 
least restrictive condition, serve as standard in all that bears 
on the practical. 

Although we must say of the transcendental concepts of A 329 



320 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

reason that they are only ideas &gt; this is not by any means to be 
taken as signifying that they are superfluous and void. For 
even if they cannot determine any object, they may yet, in a 
fundamental and unobserved fashion, be of service to the 
understanding as a canon for its extended and consistent em- 
ployment. The understanding does not thereby obtain more 
knowledge of any object than it would have by means of its 
own concepts, but for the acquiring of such knowledge it 
receives better and more extensive guidance. Further what 

B 386 we need here no more than mention concepts of reason may 
perhaps make possible a transition from the concepts of 
nature to the practical concepts, and in that way may give 
support to the moral ideas themselves, bringing them into 
connection with the speculative knowledge of reason. As to 
all this, we must await explanation in the sequel. 

In accordance with our plan we leave aside the practical 
ideas, and consider reason only in its speculative, or rather, 
restricting ourselves still further, only in its transcendental 
employment. Here we must follow the path that we have 
taken in the deduction of the categories; we must consider 
the logical form of knowledge through reason, to see whether 
perhaps reason may not thereby be likewise a source of con- 
cepts which enable us to regard objects in themselves as deter- 
mined synthetically a priori ', in relation to one or other of the 
functions of reason. 

A 330 Reason, considered as the faculty of a certain logical form 
of knowledge, is the faculty of inferring, i.e. judging medi- 
ately (by the subsumption of the condition of a possible judg- 
ment under the condition of a given judgment). The given 
judgment is the universal rule (major premiss). The subsump- 
tion of the condition of another possible judgment under the 
condition of the rule is the minor premiss. The actual judg- 
ment which applies the assertion of the rule to 1 the subsumed 

B 387 case is the conclusion. The rule states something universally, 
subject to a certain condition. The condition of the rule is 
found to be fulfilled in an actual case. What has been asserted 
to be universally valid under that condition is therefore to be 
regarded as valid also in the actual case, which involves that 
condition. It is very evident, therefore, that reason arrives at 

1 [Reading, with 4th edition, zu for in.] 



THE TRANSCENDENTAL IDEAS 321 

knowledge by means of acts of the understanding which con- 
stitute a series of conditions. Thus if I arrive at the proposi- 
tion that all bodies are alterable, only by beginning with 
the more remote knowledge (in which the concept of body 
does not occur, but which nevertheless contains the condi- 
tion of that concept), namely, that everything composite is 
alterable; if I then proceed from this to a proposition which 
is less remote and stands under the condition of the last- 
named proposition, namely, that bodies are composite; and if 
from this I finally pass to a third proposition, which connects 
the more remote knowledge (alterable) with the knowledge 
actually before me, and so conclude that bodies are alter- A 331 
able by this procedure I have arrived at knowledge (a con- 
clusion) by means of a series of conditions (the premisses). 
Now every series the exponent of which is given (in categori- 
cal or hypothetical judgment) can be continued; consequently 
this same activity of reason leads to ratiodnatio polysyllo- 
gistica, which 1 is a series of inferences that can be prolonged 
indefinitely on the side either of the conditions (per pro syllo- B 388 
gismos) or of the conditioned (per episyllogismos). 

*But we soon become aware that the chain or series of pro- 
syllogisms, that is, of inferred knowledge on the side of the 
grounds or conditions of a given knowledge, in other words, of 
the ascending series of syllogisms, must stand in a different 
relation to the faculty of reason from that of the descending 
series, that is, of the advance of reason in the direction of the 
conditioned, by means of episyllogisms. For since in the former 
case the knowledge (conclusio) is given only as conditioned, we 
cannot arrive at it by means of reason otherwise than on the 
assumption that all the members of the series on the side of the 
conditions are given (totality in the series of the premisses); 
only on this assumption is the judgment before us possible 
a priori', whereas on the side of the conditioned, in respect of 
consequences, we only think a series in process of becoming, A 332 
not one already presupposed or given in its completeness, and 
therefore an advance that is merely potential. If, therefore, 
knowledge be viewed as conditioned, reason is constrained to 
regard the series of conditions in the ascending line as com- 
pleted and as given in their totality. But if the same knowledge 
1 [Reading, with Erdmann, welche for welches.] 



322 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

is viewed as a condition of yet other knowledge, and this know- 
B 389 ledge as constituting a series of consequences in a descend- 
ing line, reason can be quite indifferent as to how far this 
advance extends a parte posteriori ', and whether a totality of 
the series is possible at all. For it does not need such a series 
in order to be able to draw its conclusion, this being already 
sufficiently determined and secured by its grounds a parte 
priori. The series of premisses on the side of the conditions 
may have a first member, as its highest condition, or it may 
have no such member, in which case it is without limits a parte 
priori. But however this may be, and even admitting that we 
can never succeed in comprehending a totality of conditions, 1 
the series must none the less contain such a totality, and the 
entire series must be unconditionally true if the conditioned, 
which is regarded as a consequence resulting from it, is to be 
counted as true. This is a requirement of reason, which an- 
nounces its knowledge as being determined a priori and as 
necessary, either in itself, in which case it needs no grounds, 
or, if it be derivative, as a member of a series of grounds, 
which itself, as a series, is unconditionally true. 



B 333} FIRST BOOK OF THE TRANSCENDENTAL 

DIALECTIC 

Section 3 
SYSTEM OF THE TRANSCENDENTAL IDEAS 

We are not at present concerned with logical dialectic, 
which abstracts from all the content of knowledge and con- 
fines itself to exposing the fallacies concealed in the form of 
syllogisms, but with a transcendental dialectic which has to 
contain, completely a priori^ the origin of certain modes of 
knowledge derived from pure reason as well as of certain 
inferred concepts, the object of which can never be given em- 
pirically and which therefore lie entirely outside [the sphere 
of] the faculty of pure understanding. From the natural rela- 
tion which the transcendental employment of our knowledge, 
alike in inferences and in judgments, must bear to its logical 

1 [Reading, with Erdmann, Bedingungen for Bedingung^ 



THE TRANSCENDENTAL IDEAS 323 

employment, we have gathered that there can be only three 
kinds of dialectical inference, corresponding to the three 
kinds of inference through which reason can arrive at know- 
ledge by means of principles, and that in all of these its busi- 
ness is to ascend from the conditioned synthesis, to which 
understanding always remains restricted, to the unconditioned, 
which understanding can never reach. 

The relations which are to be universally found in all our 
representations are (i) relation to the subject; (2) relation to { 
objects, either as appearances or as objects of thought in 
general. If we combine the subdivision with the main division, 
all relation of representations, of which we can form either a 
concept or an idea, is then threefold: (i) the relation to the 
subject; (2) the relation to the manifold of the object in the 
[field of] appearance; (3) the relation to all things in general. 

Now all pure concepts in general are concerned with the 
synthetic unity of representations, but [those of them which 
are] concepts of pure reason (transcendental ideas) are con- 
cerned with the unconditioned synthetic unity of all conditions 
in general. All transcendental ideas can therefore be arranged in 
three classes, \hzfirst containing the absolute (unconditioned) 
unity of the thinking subject ', the second the absolute unity of 
the series of conditions of appearance, the third the absolute 
unity of the condition of all objects of thought in general. * 

The thinking subject is the object 2 of psychology, the sum- 
total of all appearances (the world) is the object of cosmology, 
and the thing 3 which contains the highest condition of the 
possibility of all that can be thought (the being of all beings) 
the object of theology. Pure reason thus furnishes the idea 
for a transcendental doctrine of the soul (psychologia ratio- 
nalis), for a transcendental science of the world (cosmologia B 392 
rationalis), and, finally, for a transcendental knowledge of A 335 
God (theologia transzendentalis). The understanding is not in 
a position to yield even the mere project of any one of these 
sciences, not even though it be supported by the highest 
logical employment of reason, that is, by all the conceiv- 
able inferences through which we seek to advance from one 
of its objects (appearance) to all others, up to the most remote 

1 [Following Erdmann, in italicising iiberhaupt.} 
1 [der Gegenstand.} * [das Ding.] 



324 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

members of the empirical synthesis; each of these sciences is 
an altogether pure and genuine product, or problem, of pure 
reason. 

In what precise modes the pure concepts of reason come 
under these three headings of all transcendental ideas will be 
fully explained in the next chapter. They follow the guiding- 
thread of the categories. For pure reason never relates directly 
to objects, but to the concepts which understanding frames 
in regard to objects. Similarly it is only by the process of 
completing our argument that it can be shown how reason, 
simply by the synthetic employment of that very function of 
which it makes use in categorical syllogisms, is necessarily 
brought to the concept of the absolute unity of the thinking 
subject, how the logical procedure used in hypothetical syllo- 
gisms leads to the idea 1 of the completely unconditioned in a 
series of given conditions, and finally how the mere form of 
A 235} tne disjunctive syllogism must necessarily involve the highest 
concept of reason, that of a being of all beings a thought 
which, at first sight, seems utterly paradoxical. 

No objective deduction, such as we have been able to give 
of the categories, is, strictly speaking, possible in the case of 
these transcendental ideas. Just because they are only ideas 
they have, in fact, no relation to any object that could be given 
as coinciding with them. We can, indeed, undertake a sub- 
jective derivation 2 of them from the nature of our reason; and 
this has been provided in the present chapter. 

As is easily seen, what pure reason alone has in view is 
the absolute totality of the synthesis on the side of the con- 
ditions (whether of inherence, of dependence, or of concur- 
rence); it is not concerned with absolute completeness on the 
side of the conditioned. For the former alone is required in 
order to presuppose the whole series of the conditions, and 
to present it a priori to the understanding. Once we are given 
a complete (and unconditioned) condition, no concept of 
reason is required for the continuation of the series; for every 
B 394 step in the forward direction from the condition to the con- 
ditioned is carried through by the understanding itself. The 

1 [Reading, with Erdmann, Vernunftschltissen die Idee vom for Ideen die 
vom.] i 

* [Reading, with Mellin, Ableitung for Anleitung^ 



THE TRANSCENDENTAL IDEAS 325 

transcendental ideas thus serve only for ascending, in the 
series of conditions, to the unconditioned, that is, to principles. 
As regards the descending to the conditioned, reason does, A 337 
indeed, make a very extensive logical employment of the 
laws of understanding, but no kind of transcendental employ- 
ment; and if we form an idea of the absolute totality of such 
a synthesis (of the progressus), as, for instance, of the whole 
series of ^.future alterations in the world, this is a creation of 
the mind (ens rationis) which is only arbitrarily thought, and 
not a necessary presupposition of reason. For the possibility 
of the conditioned presupposes the totality of its conditions, 
but not of its consequences. Such a concept is not, therefore, 
one of the transcendental ideas; and it is with these alone that 
we have here to deal. 

Finally, we also discern that a certain connection and 
unity is evident among the transcendental ideas themselves, 
and that by means of them pure reason combines all its 
modes of knowledge into a system. The advance from the 
knowledge of oneself (the soul) to the knowledge of the world, 
and by means of this to the original being, is so natural that it 
seems to resemble the logical advance of reason from premisses B 395 
to conclusion." Whether this is due to a concealed relationship 
of the same kind as subsists between the logical and the trans- 
cendental procedure, is one of the questions that await answer 

[Note added in 2nd edition.] Metaphysics has as the proper ob- 
ject of its enquiries three ideas only: God ', freedom, and immortality 
so related that the second concept, when combined with the first, 
should lead to the third as a necessary conclusion. Any other matters 
with which this science may deal serve merely as a means of arriving 
at these ideas and of establishing their reality. It does not need the 
ideas for the purposes of natural science, but in order to pass beyond 
nature. Insight into them would render theology and morals, and, 
through the union of these two, likewise religion, and therewith the 
highest ends of our existence, entirely and exclusively dependent on 
the faculty of speculative reason. In a systematic representation of 
the ideas, the order cited, the synthetic, would be the most suitable; 
but in the investigation which must necessarily precede it the 
analytic, or reverse order, is better adapted to the purpose of com- 
pleting our great project, as enabling us to start from what is im- 
mediately given us in experience advancing from the doctrine of 
the soul, to the doctrine of the world, and thence to the knowledge 
of God. 



326 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

A 338 in the course of these enquiries. Indeed, we have already, 
in a preliminary manner, obtained an answer to the question, 

B 396 since in treating of the transcendental concepts of reason, 
which, in philosophical theory, are commonly confused with 
others, and not properly distinguished even from concepts of 
understanding, we have been able to rescue them from their 
ambiguous position, to determine their origin, and at the 
same time, in so doing, to fix their precise number (to which 
we can never add), presenting them in a systematic connec- 
tion, and so marking out and enclosing a special field for pure 
reason. 



THE TRANSCENDENTAL DIALECTIC 

BOOK II 
THE DIALECTICAL INFERENCES OF PURE REASON 

ALTHOUGH a purely transcendental idea is, in accordance 
with the original laws of reason, a quite necessary product of 
reason, its object, it may yet be said, is something of which 
we have no concept. For in respect of an object which is 
adequate to the demands of reason, it is not, in fact, possible 
that we should ever be able to form a concept of the under- A 339 
sta/iding, that is, a concept that allows of being exhibited and 
intuited in a possible experience. But we should be better 
advised and less likely to be misunderstood if we said that B 397 
although we cannot have any knowledge of the object which 
corresponds to an idea, we yet have a problematic concept 
of it. 

The transcendental (subjective) reality of the pure concepts 
of reason depends on our having been led to such ideas by a 
necessary syllogism. 1 There will therefore be syllogisms which 
contain no empirical premisses, and by means of which we 
conclude from something which we know to something else of 
which we have no concept, and to which, owing to an inevitable 
illusion, we yet ascribe objective reality. These conclusions 
are, then, rather to be called pseudo-rational* than rational, 
although in view of their origin they may well lay claim to 
the latter title, since they are not fictitious and have not arisen 
fortuitously, but have sprung from the very nature of reason. 
They are sophistications not of men but of pure reason itself. 
Even the wisest of men cannot free himself from them. After 
long effort he perhaps succeeds in guarding himself against 

1 [Vernunftschluss.] * [verniinftelnde.] 

327 



328 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

actual error; but he will never be able to free himself from the 
illusion, which unceasingly mocks and torments him. 

There are, then, only three kinds of dialectical syllogisms 

A 340 just so many as there are ideas in which their conclusions 
result. In the first kind of syllogism I conclude from the 

B 398 transcendental concept of the subject, which contains nothing 
manifold, the absolute unity of this subject itself, of which, 
however, even in so doing, I possess no concept whatsoever. 
This dialectical inference I shall entitle the transcendental 
paralogism. The second kind of pseudo-rational inference is 
directed to the transcendental concept of the absolute totality 
of the series of conditions for any given appearance. From the 
fact that my concept of the unconditioned synthetic unity of the 
series, as thought in a certain way, is always self-contradictory, 
I conclude that there is really a unity of the opposite kind, 
although of it also I have no concept. The position of reason in 
these dialectical inferences I shall entitle the antinomy of pure 
reason. Finally, in the third kind of pseudo-rational inference, 
from the totality of the conditions under which objects in 
general, in so far as they can be given me, have to be thought, 
I conclude to the absolute synthetic unity of all conditions of 
the possibility of things in general, i.e. from things which I do 
not know through the merely transcendental concept of them 
I infer an ens entium&gt; which I know even less through any 
transcendental 1 concept, and of the unconditioned necessity 
of which I can form no concept whatsoever. This dialectical 
syllogism I shall entitle the ideal of pure reason. 



SECOND BOOK OF THE TRANSCENDENTAL 
399 J 

DIALECTIC 

CHAPTER I 

THE PARALOGISMS OF PURE REASON 

A logical paralogism is a syllogism which is fallacious in 
form, be its content what it may. A transcendental paralogism 
is one in which there is a transcendental ground, constraining 
us to draw a formally invalid conclusion. Such a fallacy is 

1 [Reading, with the 4th edition, transcendental for transcendent.] 



PARALOGISMS OF PURE REASON 329 

therefore grounded in the nature of human reason, and gives 
rise to an illusion which cannot be avoided, although it may, 
indeed, be rendered harmless. 

We now come to a concept which was not included in the 
general list of transcendental concepts but which must yet be 
counted as belonging to that list, without, however, in the least 
altering it or declaring it defective. This is the concept or, if the 
term be preferred, the judgment, 'I think'. As is easily seen, 
this is the vehicle of all concepts, and therefore also of tran- 
scendental concepts, and so is always included in the conceiv- 
ing of these latter, and is itself transcendental. But it can have 
no special designation, because it serves only to introduce all our B 400 
thought, as belonging to consciousness. Meanwhile, however 
free it be of empirical admixture (impressions of the senses), A 342 
it yet enables us to distinguish, through the nature of our 
faculty of representation, two kinds of objects. T, as think- 
ing, am an object of inner sense, and am called 'soul'. That 
which is an object of the outer senses is called 'body'. Accord- 
ingly the expression T, as a thinking being, signifies the 
object of that psychology which may be entitled the 'rational 
doctrine of the soul', inasmuch as I am not here seeking to 
learn in regard to the soul anything more than can be in- 
ferred, independently of all experience (which determines me 
more specifically and in concrete) , from this concept T, so 
far as it is present in all thought. 

The rational doctrine of the soul is really an undertaking 
of this kind; for if in this science the least empirical element 
of my thought, or any special perception of my inner state, 
were intermingled with the grounds of knowledge, it would 
no longer be a rational but an empirical doctrine of the soul. 
Thus we have here what professes to be a science built upon 
the single proposition 'I think*. Whether this claim be well or 
ill grounded, we may, very fittingly, in accordance with the 
nature of a transcendental philosophy, proceed to investi- 
gate. The reader must not object that this proposition, which 
expresses the perception of the self, contains an inner experi- B 401 
ence, and that the rational doctrine of the soul founded upon 
it is never pure and is therefore to that extent based upon an A 343 
empirical principle. For this inner perception is nothing more 
than the mere apperception '/ think\ by which even tran- 



330 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

scendental concepts are made possible; what we assert in them 
is 'I think substance, cause', etc. For inner experience in 
general and its possibility, or perception in general and its 
relation to other perception, in which no special distinction 
or empirical determination is given, is not to be regarded as 
empirical knowledge but as knowledge of the empirical in 
general, and has to be reckoned with the investigation of the 
possibility of any and every experience, which is certainly a 
transcendental enquiry. The least object of perception (for ex- 
ample, even pleasure or displeasure 1 ), if added 2 to the universal 
representation of self-consciousness, would at once transform 
rational psychology into empirical psychology. 

'/ think' is, therefore, the sole text of rational psychology, 
and from it the whole of its teaching has to be developed. 
Obviously, if this thought is to be related to an object (myself), 
it can contain none but transcendental predicates of that ob- 
ject, since the least empirical predicate would destroy the 
rational purity of the science and its independence of all 
experience. 

All that is here required is that we follow the guidance ^of 
the categories, with this difference only, that since our starting- 
point is a given thing, T as thinking being, we begin with the 
category of substance, whereby a thing in itself is represented, 
and so proceed backwards through the series, without, how- 
ever, otherwise changing the order adopted in the table of the 
categories. The topic of the rational doctrine of the soul, from 
which everything else that it contains must be derived, is 
accordingly as follows: 

I 
The soul is substance* 

2 3 

As regards its quality it is As regards the different 
simple. times in which it exists, it is 

numerically identical, that 
is, unity (not plurality). 

1 [Unlust.] 

* [Reading, with Erdmann, welches for welche.} 

8 [In his private copy of the Critique [Nachtrage, No. CLXI] Kant has 
changed this to: The soul exists as substance.] 



PARALOGISMS OF PURE REASON 331 

4 
It is in relation to possible objects in space .* 

All the concepts of pure psychology arise from these ele- |g 345 
ments, simply by way of combination, without admission of 
any other principle. This substance, merely as object of inner 
sense, gives the concept oi immateriality, as simple substance, 
that of incorruptibility, its identity, as intellectual substance, 
personality] all these three together, spirituality] while the 
relation to objects in space gives commercium with bodies, 
and so leads us to represent the thinking substance as the 
principle of life in matter, that is, as soul (anima), and as the 
ground of animality. This last, in turn, as limited by spiritu- 
ality, gives the concept of immortality. 

In connection with these concepts we have four paralogisms 
of a transcendental psychology which is wrongly regarded as 
a science of pure reason concerning the nature of our thinking 
being. We can assign no other basis for this teaching than the B 404 
simple, and in itself completely empty, representation '/'; and we A 346 
cannot even say that this is a concept, but only that it is a bare 
consciousness which accompanies all concepts. Through this 
I or he or it (the thing) which thinks, nothing further is repre- 
sented than a transcendental subject of the thoughts = X. It 
is known only through the thoughts which are its predicates, 
and of it, apart from them, we cannot have any concept what- 
soever, but can only revolve in a perpetual circle, since any 
judgment upon it has always already made use of its repre- 
sentation. And the reason why this inconvenience is insepar- 
ably bound up with it, is that consciousness in itself is not a 
representation distinguishing a particular object, but a form 

a The reader who has difficulty in guessing the psychological 
meaning of these expressions taken in their transcendental abstract- 
ness, and in discovering why the last-mentioned attribute of the soul 
belongs to the category of existence, will find the terms sufficiently B 403 
explained and justified in the sequel. Further, I have to apologise 
for the Latin expressions which, contrary to good taste, have usurped 
the place of their German equivalents, both in this section and in the 
work as a whole. My excuse is that I have preferred to lose somewhat 
in elegance of language rather than to increase, in however minor 
a degree, the reader's difficulties. 



332 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

of representation in general, that is, of representation in so far 
as it is to be entitled knowledge; for it is only of knowledge 
that I can say that I am thereby thinking something. 

It must, on first thoughts, seem strange that the condition 
under which alone I think, and which is therefore merely a pro- 
perty of myself as subject, should likewise be valid for every- 
thing that thinks, and that on a seemingly empirical proposition 
we can presume to base an apodeictic and universal judgment, 
namely, that that which thinks must, in all cases, be constituted 

B 405 as the voice of self-consciousness declares it to be constituted 
in my own self. The reason is this: we must assign to things, 

A 347 necessarily and a priori, all the properties that constitute the 
conditions under which alone we think them. Now I cannot 
have any representation whatsoever of a thinking being, 
through any outer experience, but only through self-conscious- 
ness. Objects of this kind are, therefore, nothing more than 
the transference of this consciousness of mine to other things, 
which in this way alone can be represented as thinking beings. 
The proposition, 'I think', is, however, here taken only prob- 
lematically, not in so far as it may contain perception of an 
existent (the Cartesian cogito, ergo sum), but in respect of its 
mere possibility, in order to see what properties applicable to 
its subject (be that subject actually existent or not) may follow 
from so simple a proposition. 

If our knowledge of thinking beings in general, by means 
of pure reason, were based on more than the cogito, if we 
likewise made use of observations concerning the play of our 
thoughts and the natural laws of the thinking self to be de- 
rived from these thoughts, there would arise an empirical psy- 
chology, which would be a kind of physiology of inner sense, 
capable perhaps of explaining the appearances of inner sense, 
but never of revealing such properties as do not in any way 

B 406 belong to possible experience (e.g. the properties of the simple), 
nor of yielding any apodeictic knowledge regarding the nature 
of thinking beings in general. It would not, therefore, be a 
rational psychology. 

A 348 Since the proposition 'I think' (taken problematically) con- 
tains the form of each and every judgment of the understand- 
ing and accompanies all categories as their vehicle, it is evi- 
dent that the inferences from it admit only of a transcendental 



PARALOGISMS OF PURE REASON (A) 333 

employment of the understanding. And since this employment 
excludes any admixture of experience, we cannot, after what 
has been shown above, entertain any favourable anticipations 
in regard to its methods of procedure. We therefore propose to 
follow it, with a critical eye, through all the predicaments of 
pure psychology. 

[The Paralogisms of Pure Reason: as in 1st edition^ 

FIRST PARALOGISM: OF SUBSTANTIALITY 

That, the representation of which is the absolute subject of 
our judgments and cannot therefore be employed as deter- 
mination of another thing, is substance. 

I, as a thinking being, am the absolute subject of all my 
possible judgments, and this representation of myself cannot 
be employed as predicate of any other thing. 

Therefore I, as thinking being (soul), am substance. 

Criticism of the First Paralogism of Pure Psychology 


In the analytical part of the Transcendental Logic we have 
shown that pure categories, and among them that of sub- 
stance, have in themselves no objective meaning, save in so far 
as they rest upon an intuition, and are applied to the manifold A 349 
of this intuition, as functions of synthetic unity. In the ab- 
sence of this manifold, they are merely functions of a judg- 
ment, without content. I can say of any and every thing that 
it is substance, in the sense that I distinguish it from mere 
predicates and determinations of things. Now in all our 
thought the T is the subject, in which thoughts inhere only 
as determinations; and this T cannot be employed as the 
determination of another thing. Everyone must, therefore, 
necessarily regard himself as substance, and thought as [con- 
sisting] only [in] accidents of his being, determinations of his 
state. 

But what use am I to make of this concept of a substance? 
That I, as a thinking being, persist for myself, and do not in 
any natural manner either arise or perish, can by no means be 

1 ["The Paralogisms of Pure Reason," as here given up to p. 367, were 
omitted in B. As restated in B, they are given below, pp. 368 to 383.] 



334 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

deduced from it. Yet there is no other use to which I can put 
the concept of the substantiality of my thinking subject, and 
apart from such use I could very well dispense with it. 

So far from being able to deduce these properties merely 
from the pure category of substance, we must, on the contrary, 
take our start from the permanence of an object given in ex- 
perience as permanent. For only to such an object can the 
concept of substance be applied in a manner that is empiric- 
ally serviceable. In the above proposition, however, we have 
not taken as our basis any experience; the inference is merely 

A 350 from the concept of the relation which all thought has to the 
T as the common subject in which it inheres. Nor should we, in 
resting it upon experience, be able, by any sure observation, to 
demonstrate such permanence. The T is indeed in all thoughts, 
but there is not in this representation the least trace of intui- 
tion, distinguishing the T from other objects of intuition. 
Thus we can indeed perceive that this representation is invari- 
ably present in all thought, but not that it is an abiding and 
continuing intuition, wherein the thoughts, as being transitory, 
give place to one another. 

It follows, therefore, that the first syllogism of tran- 
scendental psychology, when it puts forward the constant logi- 
cal subject of thought as being knowledge of the real subject 
in which the thought inheres, is palming off upon us what is 
a mere pretence of new insight. We do not have, and cannot 
have, any knowledge whatsoever of any such subject. Con- 
sciousness is, indeed, that which alone makes all representa- 
tions to be thoughts, and in it, therefore, as the transcendental 
subject, all our perceptions must be found; but beyond this 
logical meaning of the T, we have no knowledge of the sub- 
ject in itself, which as substratum underlies this T, as it does 
all thoughts. The proposition, l The soul is substance', may, 
however, quite well be allowed to stand, if only it be recog- 
nised that this concept [of the soul as substance] does not 
carry us 1 a single step further, and so cannot yield us any of the 

A 351 usual deductions of the pseudo-rational doctrine of the soul, 
as, for instance, the everlasting duration of the human soul in 
all changes and even in death if, that is to say, we recognise 
that this concept signifies a substance only in idea, not in reality. 

1 [Reading, with Hartenstein, uns for unser.] 



PARALOGISMS OF PURE REASON (A) 335 



SECOND PARALOGISM: OF SIMPLICITY 

That, the action of which can never be regarded as the 
concurrence of several things acting, is simple. 

Now the soul, or the thinking T, is such a being. There- 
fore, etc. 

Critique of the Second Paralogism of Transcendental 
Psychology 

This is the Achilles of all dialectical inferences in the pure 
doctrine of the soul. It is no mere sophistical play, contrived 
by a dogmatist in order to impart to his assertions a super- 
ficial plausibility, but an inference which appears to with- 
stand even the keenest scrutiny and the most scrupulously 
exact investigation. It is as follows. 

Every composite substance is an aggregate of several sub- 
stances, and the action of a composite, or whatever inheres in 
it as thus composite, is an aggregate of several actions or acci- 
dents, distributed among the plurality of the substances. Now 
an 'effect which arises from the concurrence of many acting A 352 
substances is indeed possible, namely, when this effect is 
external only (as, for instance, the motion of a body is the 
combined motion of all its parts). But with thoughts, as in- 
ternal accidents belonging to a thinking being, it is different. 
For suppose it be the composite that thinks: then every part of 
it would be a part of the thought, and only all of them taken 
together would contain the whole thought. But this cannot con- 
sistently be maintained. For representations (for instance, the 
single words of a verse), distributed among different beings, 
never make up a whole thought (a verse), and it is therefore 
impossible that a thought should inhere in what is essentially 
composite. It is therefore possible only in a single substance, 
which, not being an aggregate of many, is absolutely simple." 

The so-called nervus probandi of this argument lies in the 
proposition, that in order to constitute a thought many repre- 
sentations must be contained in the absolute unity of the 

This proof can very easily be given the customary syllogistic 
correctness of form. But for my purpose it is sufficient to have made 
clear, though in popular fashion, the bare ground of proof. 



336 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

thinking subject. No one, however, can prove this proposition 
from concepts. For how should he set about the task of achiev- 
A 353 ing this? The proposition, 'A thought can only be the effect 
of the absolute unity of the thinking being', cannot be treated 
as analytic. For the unity of the thought, which consists of 
many representations, is collective, and as far as mere con- 
cepts can show, may relate just as well to the collective unity 
of different substances acting together (as the motion of a 
body is the composite motion of all its parts) as to the absolute 
unity of the subject. Consequently, the necessity of presuppos- 
ing, in the case of a composite thought, a simple substance, 
cannot be demonstrated in accordance with the principle of 
identity. Nor will anyone venture to assert that the proposi- 
tion allows of being known synthetically and completely 
a priori from mere concepts not, at least, if he understands 
the ground of the possibility of a priori synthetic propositions, 
as above explained. 

It is likewise impossible to derive this necessary unity of 
the subject, as a condition of the possibility of every thought, 
from experience. For experience yields us no knowledge of 
necessity, apart even from the fact that the concept of absolute 
unity is quite outside its province. Whence then are we to 
derive this proposition upon which the whole psychological 
syllogism depends? 

It is obvious that, if I wish to represent to myself a think- 
ing being, I must put myself in his place, and thus substitute, 
as it were, my own subject for the object I am seeking to 
A 354 consider (which does not occur in any other kind of investiga- 
tion), and that we demand the absolute unity of the subject of 
a thought, only because otherwise we could not say, '/think' 
(the manifold in a representation). For although the whole of 
the thought could be divided and distributed among many 
subjects, the subjective '/' can never be thus divided and 
distributed, and it is this T that we presuppose in all 
thinking. 

Here again, as in the former paralogism, the formal pro- 
position of apperception, 'I think', remains the sole ground to 
which rational psychology can appeal when it thus ventures 
upon an extension of its knowledge. This proposition, how- 
ever, is not itself an experience, but the form of apperception, 



PARALOGISMS OF PURE REASON (A) 337 

which belongs to and precedes every experience; and as such 
it must always be taken only in relation to some possible 
knowledge, as a merely subjective condition of that know- 
ledge. We have no right to transform it into a condition of the 
possibility of a knowledge of objects, that is, into a concept of 
thinking being in general. For we are not in a position to re- 
present such being to ourselves save by putting ourselves, 
with the formula of our consciousness, in the place of every 
other intelligent being. 

Nor is the simplicity of myself (as soul) really inferred 
from the proposition, 'I think'; it 1 is already involved in every 
thought. The proposition, 'I am simple', must be regarded as 
an immediate expression of apperception, just as what is A 355 
referred to as the Cartesian inference, cogito, ergo sum, is 
really a tautology, since the cogito (sum cogitans) asserts my 
existence immediately. V am simple' means nothing more 
than that this representation, T, does not contain in itself the 
least manifoldncss and that it is absolute (although merely 
logical) unity. 

t Thus the renowned psychological proof is founded merely 
on the indivisible unity of a representation, which governs 
only the verb in its relation to a person. It is obvious that in 
attaching T to our thoughts 2 we designate the subject of in- 
herence only transcendentally, without noting in it any quality 
whatsoever in fact, without knowing anything of it either by 
direct acquaintance or otherwise. 3 It means a something in 
general (transcendental subject), the representation of which 
must, no doubt, be simple, if only for the reason that there is 
nothing determinate in it. Nothing, indeed, can be represented 
that is simpler than that which is represented through the 
concept of a mere something. But the simplicity of the repre- 
sentation of a subject is not eo ipso knowledge of the simplicity 
of the subject itself, for we abstract altogether from its pro- 
perties when we designate it solely by the entirely empty 
expression T, an expression which I can apply to every 
thinking subject. 

This much, then, is certain, that through the T, I always A 356 

1 [Reading, with Erdmann, die for der.] 

2 [Reading, with Erdmann, den for dem.} 

8 [etwas von ihm zu kennen, oder zu wissen.} 



338 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

entertain the thought of an absolute, but logical, unity of the 
subject (simplicity). It does not, however, follow that I thereby 
know the actual simplicity of my subject. The proposition, 'I 
am substance', signifies, as we have found, nothing but the 
pure category, of which I can make no use (empirically) in 
concreto\ and I may therefore legitimately say: 'I am a simple 
substance', that is, a substance the representation of which never 
contains a synthesis of the manifold. But this concept, as also 
the proposition, tells us nothing whatsoever in regard to my- 
self as an object of experience, since the concept of substance 
is itself used only as a function of synthesis, without any under- 
lying intuition, and therefore without an object. It concerns 
only the condition of our knowledge; it does not apply to any 
assignable object. We will test the supposed usefulness of the 
proposition by an experiment. 

Everyone must admit that the assertion of the simple nature 
of the soul is of value only in so far as I can thereby dis- 
tinguish this subject from all matter, and so can exempt it 
from the dissolution to which matter is always liable. This is 
indeed, strictly speaking, the only use for which the above 
proposition is intended, and is therefore generally expressed 
A 357 as 'The soul is not corporeal'. If, then, I can show that, 
although we allow full objective validity the validity ap- 
propriate to a judgment of pure reason derived solely from 
pure categories to this cardinal proposition of the rational 
doctrine of the soul (that is, that everything which thinks is a 
simple substance), we still cannot make the least use of this 
proposition in regard to the question of its dissimilarity from 
or relation to matter, this will be the same as if I had relegated 
this supposed psychological insight to the field of mere ideas, 
without any real objective use. 

In the Transcendental Aesthetic we have proved, beyond 
all question, that bodies are mere appearances of our outer 
sense and not things in themselves. We are therefore justified 
in saying that our thinking subject is not corporeal; in other 
words, that, inasmuch as it is represented by us as object of 
inner sense, it cannot, in so far as it thinks, be an object of 
outer sense, that is, an appearance in space. This is equivalent 
to saying that thinking beings, as such } can never be found by 
us among outer appearances, and that their thoughts, con- 



PARALOGISMS OF PURE REASON (A) 339 

sciousness, desires, etc., cannot be outwardly intuited. All these 
belong to inner sense. This argument does, in fact, seem to 
be so natural and so popular that even the commonest under- 
standing appears to have always relied upon it, and thus al- A 358 
ready, from the earliest times, to have regarded souls as quite 
different entities from their bodies. 

But although extension, impenetrability, cohesion, and 
motion in short, everything which outer senses can give us 
neither are 1 nor contain thoughts, feeling, desire, or resolu- 
tion, these never being objects of outer intuition, nevertheless 
the something which underlies the outer appearances and 
which so affects our sense that it obtains the representations 
of space, matter, shape, etc., may yet, when viewed as nou- 
menon (or better, as transcendental object), be at the same 
time the subject of our thoughts. That the mode in which 
our outer sense is thereby affected gives us no intuition of re- 
presentations, will, etc., but only of space and its determina- 
tions, proves nothing to the contrary. For this something is 
not extended, nor is it impenetrable or composite, since all 
these predicates concern only sensibility and its intuition, in 
so far as we are affected by certain (to us otherwise unknown) 
objects. By such statements we are not, however, enabled 
to know what kind of an object it is, but only to recognise 
that if it be considered in itself, and therefore apart from any 
relation to the outer senses, these predicates of outer appear- A 359 
ances cannot be assigned to it. On the other hand, the predi- 
cates of inner sense, representations and thought, are not 
inconsistent with its nature. Accordingly, even granting the 
human soul to be simple in nature, such simplicity by no 
means suffices to distinguish it from matter, in respect of 
the substratum of the latter if, that is to say, we consider 
matter, as indeed we ought to, as mere appearance. 

If matter were a thing in itself, it would, as a composite 
being, be entirely different from the soul, as a simple being. But 
matter is mere outer appearance, the substratum of which can- 
not be known through any predicate that we can assign to it. 
I can therefore very well admit the possibility that it is in itself 
simple, although owing to the manner in which it affects our 
senses it produces in us the intuition of the extended and so of 

1 [Reading, with Erdmann, sind for setn.] 



340 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

the composite. I may further assume that the substance which 
in relation to our outer sense possesses extension is in itself the 
possessor of thoughts, and that these thoughts can by means of 
its own inner sense be consciously represented. In this way, 
what in one relation is entitled corporeal would in another 
relation be at the same time a thinking being, whose thoughts 
we cannot intuit, though we can indeed intuit their signs in 
the [field of] appearance. Accordingly, the thesis that only 
souls (as particular kinds of substances) think, would have 
to be given up; and we should have to fall back on the 
A 360 common expression that men think, that is, that the very 
same being which, as outer appearance, is extended, is (in 
itself) internally a subject, and is not composite, but is simple 
and thinks. 

But, without committing ourselves in regard to such hypo- 
theses, we can make this general remark. If I understand by 
soul a thinking being in itself, the question whether or not it is 
the same in kind as matter matter not being a thing in itself, 
but merely a species of representations in us is by its very 
terms illegitimate. For it is obvious that a thing in itself is of a 
different nature from the determinations which constitute only 
its state. 

If, on the other hand, we compare the thinking T not with 
matter but with the intelligible 1 that lies at the basis of the 
outer appearance which we call matter, we have no knowledge 
whatsoever of the intelligible, and therefore are in no position 
to say that the soul is in any inward respect different from it. 

The simple consciousness is not, therefore, knowledge of 
the simple nature of the self as subject, such as might enable us 
to distinguish it from matter, as from a composite being. 

If, therefore, in the only case 2 in which this concept can be 
of service, namely, in the comparison of myself with objects of 
outer experience, it does not suffice for determining what is 
specific and distinctive in the nature of the self, then though 
A 361 we may still profess to know that the thinking T, the soul (a 
name for the transcendental object of inner sense), is simple, 
such a way of speaking has no sort of application to real ob- 
jects, and therefore cannot in the least extend our knowledge. 

1 \rnit dem Intelligibilen^\ 
* [Following Erdmann, in omitting ihn.] 



PARALOGISMS OF PURE REASON (A) 341 

Thus the whole of rational psychology is involved in the 
collapse of its main support. Here as little as elsewhere can we 
hope to extend our knowledge through mere concepts still 
less by means of the merely subjective form of all our concepts, 
consciousness in the absence of any relation to possible ex- 
perience. For [as we have thus found], even the fundamental 
concept of a simple nature is such that it can never be met 
with in any experience, and such, therefore, that there is no 
way of attaining to it, as an objectively valid concept. 

THIRD PARALOGISM: OF PERSONALITY 

That which is conscious of the numerical identity of itself 
at different times is in so far a person, 
Now the soul is conscious, etc. 
Therefore it is a person. 

Critique of the Third Paralogism of Transcendental 
Psychology 

If I want to know through experience, the numerical iden- 
tity of an external object, I shall pay heed to that permanent A 362 
element in the appearance to which as subject everything else 
is related as determination, and note its identity throughout the 
time in which the determinations change. Now I am an object 
of inner sense, and all time is merely the form of inner sense. 
Consequently, I refer each and all of my successive determina- 
tions to the numerically identical self, and do so throughout 
time, that is, in the form of the inner intuition of myself. This 
being so, the personality of the soul has to be regarded not as 
inferred but as a completely identical proposition of self-con- 
sciousness in time; and this, indeed, is why 1 it is valid a priori. 
For it really says nothing more than that in the whole time in 
which I am conscious of myself, I am conscious of this time as 
belonging to the unity of myself; and it comes to the same 
whether I say that this whole time is in me, as individual unity, 
or that I am to be found as numerically identical in all this time. 

In my own consciousness, therefore, identity of person is 
unfailingly met with. But if I view myself from the standpoint 
of another person (as object of his outer intuition), it is this 

1 [die Ursache, weswegen.] 



342 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

outer observer who first represents me in time, for in the apper- 
ception time is represented, strictly speaking, only in me. Al- 
though he admits, therefore, the T, which accompanies, and 

A 363 indeed with complete identity, all representations at all times 
in my consciousness, he will draw no inference from this to the 
objective permanence of myself. For just as the time in which 
the observer sets me is not the time of my own but of his sensi- 
bility, so the identity which is necessarily bound up with my 
consciousness is not therefore bound up with his, that is, with 
the consciousness which contains the outer intuition of my 
subject. 

The identity of the consciousness of myself at different 
times is therefore only a formal condition of my thoughts and 
their coherence, and in no way proves the numerical identity of 
my subject. Despite the logical identity of the T,such a change 
may have occurred in it as does not allow of the retention of 
its identity, and yet we may ascribe to it the same-sounding 1 
T, which in every different state, even in one involving change 
of the [thinking] subject, might still retain the thought of the 
preceding subject and so hand it over to the subsequent 
subject. 

A 3 6 4 Although the dictum of certain ancient schools, that every- 
thing in the world is in a flux and nothing is permanent and 
abiding, cannot be reconciled with the admission of sub- 
stances, it is not refuted by the unity of self-consciousness. 

a An elastic ball which impinges on another similar ball in a 
straight line communicates to the latter its whole motion, and there- 
fore its whole state (that is, if we take account only of the positions 
in space). If, then, in analogy with such bodies, we postulate sub- 
stances such that the one communicates to the other representations 
A 364 together with the consciousness of them, we can conceive a whole 
series of substances of which the first transmits its state together 
with its consciousness to the second, the second its own state with 
that of the preceding substance to the third, and this in turn the 
states of all the preceding substances together with its own conscious- 
ness and with their consciousness to another. The last substance 
would then be conscious of all the states of the previously changed 
substances, as being its own states, because they would have been 
transferred to it together with the consciousness of them. And yet it 
would not have been one and the same person in all these states. 

1 \gleichlautende '.] 



PARALOGISMS OF PURE REASON (A) 343 

For we are unable from our own consciousness to determine 
whether, as souls, we are permanent or not. Since we reckon 
as belonging to our identical self only that of which we are 
conscious, we must necessarily judge that we are one and the 
same throughout the whole time of which we are conscious. 
We cannot, however, claim that this judgment would be valid 
from the standpoint of an outside observer. For since the only 
permanent appearance which we encounter in the soul is the 
representation T that accompanies and connects them all, we 
are unable to prove that this T, a mere thought, may not be 
in the same state of flux as the other thoughts which, by 
means of it, are linked up with one another. 

It is indeed strange that personality, and its presupposi- A 365 
tion, permanence, and therefore the substantiality of the soul, 
should have to be proved at this stage and not earlier. For 
could we have presupposed these latter [permanence and sub- 
stantiality], there would follow, not indeed the continuance of 
consciousness, yet at least the possibility of a continuing con- 
sciousness in an abiding subject, and that is already sufficient 
for personality. For personality does not itself at once cease 
because its activity is for a time interrupted. This permanence, 
however, is in no way given prior to that numerical identity 
of our self which we infer from identical apperception, but 
on the contrary is inferred first from the numerical identity. 
(If the argument proceeded aright, the concept of substance, 
which is applicable only empirically, would first be brought 
in after such proof of numerical identity.) Now, since this 
identity of person [presupposing, as it does, numerical iden- 
tity] in nowise follows from the identity of the T in the con- 
sciousness of all the time in which I know myself, we could 
not, earlier in the argument, have founded upon it the sub- 
stantiality of the soul. 

Meanwhile we may still retain the concept of personality 
just as we have retained the concept of substance and of the 
simple in so far as it is merely transcendental, that is, con- 
cerns 1 the unity of the subject, otherwise unknown to us, 
in the determinations of which there is a thoroughgoing 
connection through apperception. Taken in this way, the con- 
cept is necessary for practical employment and is sufficient for 

1 [Reading, with Adickes, d.i. Einheit des Subjcktes betrifft.] 



344 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

A 366 such use; but we can never parade it as an extension of our 
self-knowledge through pure reason, and as exhibiting to us 
from the mere concept of the identical self an unbroken con- 
tinuance of the subject. For this concept revolves perpetually 
in a circle, and does not help us in respect to any question 
which aims at synthetic knowledge. What matter may be as a 
thing in itself (transcendental object) is completely unknown 
to us, though, owing to its being represented as something ex- 
ternal, its permanence as appearance can indeed be observed. 
But if I want to observe the mere T in the change of all repre- 
sentations, I have no other correlatum to use in my comparisons 
except again myself, with the universal conditions of my con- 
sciousness. Consequently, I can give none but tautological 
answers to all questions, in that I substitute my concept and 
its unity for the properties which belong to myself as object, 
and so take for granted that which the questioner has desired 
to know. 

THE FOURTH PARALOGISM: OF IDEALITY 

(IN REGARD TO OUTER RELATION) 

That, the existence of which can only be inferred as a cause 
of given perceptions, has a merely doubtful existence. 
A 367 Now all outer appearances are of such a nature that their 
existence is not immediately perceived, and that we can only 
infer them as the cause of given perceptions. 

Therefore the existence of all objects of the outer senses is 
doubtful. This uncertainty I entitle the ideality of outer appear- 
ances, and the doctrine of this ideality is called idealism , as 
distinguished from the counter-assertion of a possible certainty 
in regard to objects of outer sense, which is called dualism. 

Critique of the Fourth Paralogism of Transcendental 
Psychology 

Let us first examine the premisses. We are justified, [it is 
argued], in maintaining that only what is in ourselves can be 
perceived immediately, and that my own existence is the sole 
object of a mere perception. The existence, therefore, of an 
actual object outside me (if this word 'me* be taken in the 



PARALOGISMS OF PURE REASON (A) 345 

intellectual [not in the empirical] sense) is never given directly 
in perception. Perception is a modification of inner sense, and 
the existence of the outer object can be added to it only in 
thought, as being its outer cause, and accordingly as being 
inferred. For the same reason, Descartes was justified in 
limiting all perception, in the narrowest sense of that term, to 
the proposition, 'I, as a thinking being, exist.' Obviously, since A 368 
what is without is not in me, I cannot encounter it in my 
apperception, nor therefore in any perception, which, properly 
regarded, is merely the determination of apperception. 

I am not, therefore, in a position to perceive external things, 
but can only infer their existence from my inner perception, 
taking the inner perception as the effect of which something 
external is the proximate cause. Now the inference from a 
given effect to a determinate cause is always uncertain, since 
the effect may be due to more than one cause. Accordingly, as 
regards the relation of the perception to its cause, it always 
remains doubtful whether the cause be internal or external; 
whether, that is to say, all the so-called outer perceptions are 
not a mere play of our inner sense, or whether they stand in 
relation to actual external objects as their cause. At all events, 
the existence of the latter is only inferred, and is open to all 
the dangers of inference, whereas the object of inner sense (I 
myself with all my representations) is immediately perceived, 
and its existence does not allow of being doubted. 

The term 'idealist' is not, therefore, to be understood as 
applying to those who deny the existence of external objects 
of the senses, but only to those who do not admit that their 
existence is known through immediate perception, and who 
therefore conclude that we can never, by way of any possible A 369 
experience, be completely certain as to their reality. 

Before exhibiting our paralogism in all its deceptive 
illusoriness, I have first to remark that we must necessarily 
distinguish two types of idealism, the transcendental and the 
empirical. By transcendental idealism I mean the doctrine 
that appearances are to be regarded as being, one and all, 
representations only, not things in themselves, and that time 
and space are therefore only sensible forms of our intuition, 
not determinations given as existing by themselves, nor con- 
ditions of objects viewed as things in themselves. To this ideal- 



346 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

ism there is opposed a transcendental realism which regards 
time and space as something given in themselves, independ- 
ently of our sensibility. The transcendental realist thus inter- 
prets outer appearances (their reality being taken as granted) 
as things-in-themselves, which exist independently of us and of 
our sensibility, and which are therefore outside us the phrase 
'outside us' being interpreted in conformity with pure con- 
cepts of understanding. It is, in fact, this transcendental realist 
who afterwards plays the part of empirical idealist. After 
wrongly supposing that objects of the senses, if they are to be 
external, must have an existence by themselves, and inde- 
pendently of the senses, he finds that, judged from this point 
of view, all our sensuous representations are inadequate to 
establish their reality. 

A 370 The transcendental idealist, on the other hand, may be an 
empirical realist or, as he is called, a dualist] that is, he may 
admit the existence of matter without going outside his mere 
self-consciousness, or assuming anything more than the cer- 
tainty of his representations, that is, the cogito, ergo sum. For 
he considers this matter and even its inner possibility to be 
appearance merely; and appearance, if separated from our 
sensibility, is nothing. Matter is with him, therefore, only a 
species of representations (intuition), which are called external, 
not as standing in relation to objects in themselves external, 
but because they relate perceptions to the space in which all 
things are external to one another, while yet the space itself is 
in us. 

From the start, we have declared ourselves in favour of 
this transcendental idealism; and our doctrine thus removes 
all difficulty in the way of accepting the existence of matter 
on the unaided testimony of our mere self-consciousness, or of 
declaring it to be thereby proved in the same manner as the 
existence of myself as a thinking being is proved. There can 
be no question that I am conscious of my representations; 
these representations and I myself, who have the representa- 
tions, therefore exist. External objects (bodies), however, are 
mere appearances, and are therefore nothing but a species of 
my representations, the objects of which are something only 
through these representations. Apart from them they are 

A 371 nothing. Thus external things exist as well as I myself, and 



PARALOGISMS OF PURE REASON (A) 347 

both, indeed, upon the immediate witness of my self-conscious- 
ness. The only difference is that the representation of myself, 
as the thinking subject, belongs to inner sense only, while 
the representations which mark extended beings belong also 
to outer sense. In order to arrive at the reality of outer objects 
I have just as little need to resort to inference as I have in re- 
gard to the reality of the object of my inner sense, that is, in 
regard to the reality of my thoughts. For in both cases alike the 
objects are nothing but representations, the immediate per- 
ception (consciousness) of which is at the same time a suffi- 
cient proof of their reality. 

The transcendental idealist is, therefore, an empirical real- 
ist, and allows to matter, as appearance, a reality which does 
not permit of being inferred, but is immediately perceived. 
Transcendental realism, on the other hand, inevitably falls 
into difficulties, and finds itself obliged to give way to em- 
pirical idealism, in that it regards the objects of outer sense as 
something distinct from the senses themselves, treating mere 
appearances as self-subsistent beings, existing outside us. On 
such a view as this, however clearly we may be conscious 1 of 
our representation of these things, it is still far from certain 
that, if the representation exists, there exists also the object 
corresponding to it. In our system, on the other hand, these 
external things, namely matter, are in all their configurations 
and alterations nothing but mere appearances, that is, repre- A 372 
sentations in us, of the reality of which we are immediately 
conscious. 

Since, so far as I know, all psychologists who adopt em- 
pirical idealism are transcendental realists, they have cer- 
tainly proceeded quite consistently in ascribing great import- 
ance to empirical idealism, as one of the problems in Regard to 
which the human mind is quite at a loss how to proceed. For 
if we regard outer appearances as representations produced in 
us by their objects, and if these objects be things existing in 
themselves outside us, it is indeed impossible to see how we can 
come to know the existence of the objects otherwise than by in- 
ference from the effect to the cause; and this being so, it must 
always remain doubtful whether the cause in question be in 
us or outside us. We can indeed admit that something, which 
1 [bei unserem besten Bewusstsein.] 



348 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

may be (in the transcendental sense) outside us, is the cause of 
our outer intuitions, but this is not the object of which we are 
thinking in the representations of matter and of corporeal 
things; for these are merely appearances, that is, mere kinds of 
representation, which are never to be met with save in us, and 
the reality of which depends on immediate consciousness, just 
as does the consciousness of my own thoughts. The transcend- 
ental object is equally unknown in respect to inner and to 
A 373 outer intuition. But it is not of this that we are here speaking, 
but of the empirical object, which is called an external object 
if it is represented in space &gt; and an inner object if it is repre- 
sented only in its time-relations. Neither space nor time, how- 
ever, is to be found save in us. 

The expression ( outside us' is thus unavoidably ambiguous 
in meaning, sometimes signifying what as thing in itself exists 
apart from us, and sometimes what belongs solely to outer 
appearance. In order, therefore, to make this concept, in the 
latter sense the sense in which the psychological question as 
to the reality of our outer intuition has to be understood 
quite unambiguous, we shall distinguish empirically external 
objects from those which may be said to be external in the 
transcendental sense, by explicitly entitling the former 'things 
which are to be found in space\ 

Space and time are indeed a priori representations, which 
dwell in us as forms of our sensible intuition, before any real 
object, determining our sense through sensation, has enabled 
us to represent the object under those sensible relations. But 
the material or real element, the something which is to be 
intuited in space, necessarily presupposes perception. Per- 
ception exhibits the reality of something in space; and in the 
absence of perception no power of imagination can invent and 
A 374 produce that something. It is sensation, therefore, that indicates 
a reality in space or 1 in time, according as it is related to the one 
or to the other mode of sensible intuition. (Once sensation is 
given if referred to an object in general, though not as deter- 
mining that object, it is entitled perception thanks to its mani- 
foldness we can picture in imagination many objects which have 
no empirical place in space or time outside the imagination.) 2 

1 [Reading, with Erdmann, oder for und,] 
8 [Brackets not in text.] 



PARALOGISMS OF PURE REASON (A) 349 

This admits of no doubt; whether we take pleasure and pain, 
or the sensations of the outer senses, colours, heat, etc., per- 
ception is that whereby the material required to enable us to 
think objects of sensible intuition must first be given. This 
perception, therefore (to consider, for the moment, only outer 
intuitions), represents something real in space. For, in the first 
place, while space is the representation of a mere possibility 
of coexistence, perception is the representation of a reality. 
Secondly, this reality is represented in outer sense, that is, in 
space. Thirdly, space is itself nothing but mere representation, 
and therefore nothing in it can count as real save only what 
is represented in it; a and conversely, what is given in it, that 
is, represented through perception, is also real in it. For if it A 375 
were not real, that is, immediately given through empirical 
intuition, it could not be pictured in imagination, since what 
is real in intuitions cannot be invented a priori. 

All outer perception, therefore, yields immediate proof of 
something real 1 in space, or rather is the real itself. In this 
sense empirical realism is beyond question; that is, there 
corresponds to our outer intuitions something real in space. 
Space itself, with all its appearances, as representations, is, 
indeed, only in me, but nevertheless the real, that is, the 
material of all objects of outer intuition, is actually given in this 
space, independently of all imaginative invention. Also, it is 
impossible that in this space anything outside us (in the tran- 
scendental sense) should be given, space itself being nothing 
outside our sensibility. Even the most rigid idealist cannot, 
therefore, require a proof that the object outside us (taking 
'outside* in the strict [transcendental] sense) corresponds to A 376 
our perception. For if there be any such object, it could not be 

a We must give full credence to this paradoxical but cofrect pro- 
position, that there is nothing in space save what is represented in it. 
For space is itself nothing but representation, and whatever is in it 
must therefore be contained in the representation. Nothing whatso- A 375 
ever is in space, save in so far as it is actually represented in it. It is 
a proposition which must indeed sound strange, that a thing can exist 
only in the representation of it, but in this case the objection falls, 
inasmuch as the things with which we are here concerned are not 
things in themselves, but appearances only, that is, representations. 

1 [wirkliches. In this section, as elsewhere, Kant uses Wirklichkeit and 
Realitat as synonymous terms.] 



350 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

represented and intuited as outside us, because such repre- 
sentation and intuition presuppose space, and reality in space, 
being the reality of a mere representation, is nothing other 
than perception itself. The real of outer appearances is there- 
fore real in perception only, and can be real in no other way. 

From perceptions knowledge of objects can be generated, 
either by mere play of imagination or by way of experience; 
and in the process there may, no doubt, arise illusory repre- 
sentations to which the objects do not correspond, the decep- 
tion being attributable sometimes to a delusion of imagination 
(in dreams) and sometimes to an error of judgment (in so-called 
sense-deception). To avoid such deceptive illusion, we have 
to proceed according to the rule: Whatever is connected with a 
perception according to empirical laws&gt; is actual. But such 
deception, as well as the provision against it, affects idealism 
quite as much as dualism, inasmuch as we are concerned only 
with the form of experience. Empirical idealism, and its mis- 
taken questionings as to the objective reality of our outer 
perceptions, is already sufficiently refuted, when it has been 
shown that outer perception yields immediate proof of some- 
A 377 thing actual in space, and that this space, although in itself 
only a mere form of representations, has objective reality in 
relation to all outer appearances, which also are nothing else 
than mere representations; and when it has likewise been 
shown that in the absence of perception even imagining and 
dreaming are not possible, and that our outer senses, as regards 
the data from which experience can arise, have therefore their 
actual corresponding objects in space. 

The dogmatic idealist would be one who denies the exist- 
ence of matter, the sceptical idealist one who doubts its exist- 
ence, because holding it to be incapable of proof. 1 The former 
must base his view on supposed contradictions in the pos- 
sibility of there being such a thing as matter at all a view 
with which we have not yet been called upon to deal. The 
following section on dialectical inferences, which represents 
reason as in strife with itself in regard to the concepts which 
it makes for itself of the possibility of what 2 belongs to the 

1 [Reading, with Erdmann, es . . . es for sie . . . sie.] 

2 [Reading, with Hartenstein and Kehrbach, die sie sich . . . dessen macht for 
die sich . . . dessen.] 



PARALOGISMS OF PURE REASON (A) 351 

connection of experience, will remove this difficulty. The 
sceptical idealist, however, who merely challenges the ground 
of our assertion and denounces as insufficiently justified our 
conviction of the existence of matter, which we thought to 
base on immediate perception, is a benefactor of human 
reason in so far as he compels us, even in the smallest ad- 
vances of ordinary experience, to keep on the watch, lest we A 378 
consider as a well-earned possession what we perhaps obtain 
only illegitimately. We are now in a position to appreciate 
the value of these idealist objections. Unless we mean to 
contradict ourselves in our commonest assertions, they drive 
us by main force to view all our perceptions, whether we 
call them inner or outer, as a consciousness only of what is 
dependent on our sensibility. They also compel us to view the 
outer objects of these perceptions not as things in themselves, 
but only as representations, of which, as of every other repre- 
sentation, we can become immediately conscious, and which 
are entitled outer because they depend on what we call 'outer 
sense', whose intuition is space. Space itself, however, is noth- 
ing but an inner mode of representation in which certain 
perceptions are connected with one another. 

If we treat outer objects as things in themselves, it is quite 
impossible to understand how we could arrive at a knowledge 
of their reality outside us, since we have to rely merely on 
the representation which is in us. For we cannot be sentient 
[of what is] outside ourselves, but only [of what is] in us, and 
the whole of our self-consciousness therefore yields nothing 
save merely our own determinations. Sceptical idealism thus 
constrains us to have recourse to the only refuge still open, 
namely, the ideality of all appearances, a doctrine which 
has already been established in the Transcendental Aesthetic 
independently of these consequences, which we could not at A 379 
that stage foresee. If then we ask, whether it follows that in the 
doctrine of the soul dualism alone is tenable, we must answer: 
'Yes, certainly; but dualism only in the empirical sense'. That 
is to say, in the connection of experience matter, as substance 
in the [field of] appearance, is really given to outer sense, just as 
the thinking T, also as substance in the [field of] appearance, 
is given to inner sense. Further, appearances in both fields 1 

1 [beiderseits .} 



352 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

must be connected with each other according to the rules which 
this category introduces into that connection of our outer as 
well as of our inner perceptions whereby they constitute one ex- 
perience. If, however, as commonly happens, we seek to extend 
the concept of dualism, and take it in the transcendental sense, 
neither it nor the two counter-alternatives pneumatism on 
the one hand, materialism on the other would have any sort 
of basis, since we should then have misapplied our concepts, 
taking the difference in the mode of representing objects, which, 
as regards what they are in themselves, still remain unknown 
to us, as a difference in the things themselves. Though the T, 
as represented through inner sense in time, and objects in space 
outside me, are specifically quite distinct appearances, they 
are not for that reason thought as being different things. 
Neither the transcendental object which underlies outer ap- 
A 380 pearances nor that which underlies inner intuition, is in itself 
either matter or a thinking being, but a ground (to us un- 
known) of the appearances which supply to us the empirical 
concept of the former as well as of the latter mode of exist- 
ence. 

If then, as this critical argument obviously compels us to 
do, we hold fast to the rule above established, and do not push 
our questions beyond the limits within which possible experi- 
ence can present us with its object, we shall never dream of 
seeking to inform ourselves about the objects of our senses as 
they are in themselves, that is, out of all relation to the senses. 
But if the psychologist takes appearances for things in them- 
selves, and as existing in and by themselves, then whether he 
be a materialist who admits into his system nothing but matter 
alone, or a spiritualist who admits only thinking beings (that 
is, beings with the form of our inner sense), or a dualist who 
accepts both, he will always, owing to this misunderstanding, 
be entangled in pseudo-rational speculations as to how that 
which is not a thing in itself, but only the appearance of a 
thing in general, can exist by itself. 

A 381 Consideration of Pure Psychology as a whole, 

in view of these Paralogisms 

If we compare the doctrine of the soul as the physiology of 
inner sense, with the doctrine of the body as a physiology of 



PARALOGISMS OF PURE REASON (A) 353 

the object of the outer senses, we find that while in both much 
can be learnt empirically, there is yet this notable difference. 
In the latter science much that is a priori can be synthetically 
known from the mere concept of an extended impenetrable 
being, but in the former nothing whatsoever that is a priori 
can be known synthetically from the concept of a thinking 
being. The cause is this. Although both are appearances, 
the appearance to outer sense has something fixed or abiding 
which supplies a substratum as the basis of its transitory 
determinations and therefore a synthetic concept, namely, 
that of space and of an appearance in space; whereas time, 
which is the sole form of our inner intuition, has nothing 
abiding, and therefore yields knowledge only of the change 
of determinations, not of any object that can be thereby deter- 
mined. For in what we entitle 'soul', everything is in con- 
tinual flux and there is nothing abiding except (if we must so 
express ourselves) the T, which is simple solely because its 
representation has no content, and therefore no manifold, and 
for this reason seems to represent, or (to use a more correct A 382 
term) denote, a simple object. In order that it should be possible, 
by pure reason, to obtain knowledge of the nature of a thinking 
being in general, this T would have to be an intuition which, 
in being presupposed in all thought (prior to all experience), 
might as intuition yield a priori synthetic propositions. This 
T is, however, as little an intuition as it is a concept of any 
object; it is the mere form of consciousness, which can accom- 
pany the two kinds of representation and which is in a position 
to elevate them to the rank of knowledge only in so far as some- 
thing else is given in intuition which provides material for a 
representation of an object. Thus the whole of rational psy- 
chology, as a science surpassing all powers of human reason, 
proves abortive, and nothing is left for us but to study our soul 
under the guidance of experience, and to confine ourselves 
to those questions which do not go beyond the limits within 
which a content can be provided for them by possible inner 
experience. 

But although rational psychology cannot be used to extend 
knowledge, and when so employed is entirely made up of 
paralogisms, still we cannot deny it a considerable negative 
value, if it is taken as nothing more than a critical treatment 

2 A 



354 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

of our dialectical inferences, those that arise from the common 
and natural reason of men. 

A 383 Why do we have resort to a doctrine of the soul founded 
exclusively on pure principles of reason? Beyond all doubt, 
chiefly in order to secure our thinking self against the danger 
of materialism. This is achieved by means of the pure con- 
cept 1 of our thinking self which we have just given. For by 
this teaching so completely are we freed from the fear that on 
the removal of matter all thought, and even the very existence 
of thinking beings, would be destroyed, that on the contrary 
it is clearly shown, that if I remove the thinking subject the 
whole corporeal world must at once vanish: it is nothing save 
an appearance in the sensibility of our subject and a mode 
of its representations. 

I admit that this does not give me any further knowledge 
of the properties of this thinking self, nor does it enable me to 
determine its permanence or even that it exists independently 
of what we may conjecture to be the transcendental sub- 
stratum of outer appearances; for the latter is just as un- 
known to me as is the thinking self. But it is nevertheless 
possible that I may find cause, on other than merely specu- 
lative grounds, to hope for an independent and continuing 
existence of my thinking nature, throughout all possible change 
of my state. In that case much will already have been gained 
if, while freely confessing my own ignorance, I am yet in a 
position to repel the dogmatic assaults of a speculative op- 

A 384 ponent, and to show him that he can never know more of the 
nature of the self 2 in denying the possibility of my expectations 
than I can know in clinging to them. 

Three other dialectical questions, constituting the real 
goal of rational psychology, are grounded on this transcend- 
ental illusion in our psychological concepts, and cannot be 
decided except by means of the above enquiries: namely (i) of 
the possibility of the communion 3 of the soul with an organised 
body, i.e. concerning animality and the state of the soul in the 
life of man; (2) of the beginning of this communion, that is, of 
the soul in and before birth; (3) of the end of this communion, 
that is, of the soul in and after death (the question of im- 
mortality). 

1 [ Vernunftbegriff] a [meines Subjekts.] [Gemeinschaft.] 



PARALOGISMS OF PURE REASON (A) 355 

Now I maintain that all the difficulties commonly found in 
these questions, and by means of which, as dogmatic objections, 
men seek to gain credit for a deeper insight into the nature of 
things than any to which the ordinary understanding can 
properly lay claim, rest on a mere delusion by which they 
hypostatise what exists merely in thought, and take it as a real 
object existing, in the same character, outside the thinking sub- 
ject. In other words, they regard extension, which is nothing 
but appearance, as a property of outer things that subsists A 385 
even apart from our sensibility, and hold that motion is 
due to these things and really occurs in and by itself, apart 
from our senses. For matter, the communion of which with 
the soul arouses so much questioning, is nothing but a mere 
form, or a particular way of representing an unknown object 
by means of that intuition which is called outer sense. There 
may well be something outside us to which this appearance, 
which we call matter, corresponds; in its character of appear- 
ance it is not, however, outside us, but is only a thought in us, 
although this thought, owing to the above-mentioned outer 
sense, represents it as existing outside us. Matter, therefore, 
does not mean a kind of substance quite distinct and hetero- 
geneous from the object of inner sense (the soul), but only the 
distinctive nature of those appearances of objects in them- 
selves unknown to us the representations of which we call 
outer as compared with those which we count as belonging to 
inner sense, although like all other thoughts these outer repre- 
sentations belong only to the thinking subject. They have, 
indeed, this deceptive property that, representing objects in 
space, they detach themselves as it were from the soul and 
appear to hover outside it. Yet the very space in which they 
are intuited is nothing but a representation, and no counter- 
part of the same quality is to be found outside the soul. Con- 
sequently, the question is no longer of the communion of the A 386 
soul with other known substances of a different kind outside us, 
but only of the connection of the representations of inner sense 
with the modifications of our outer sensibility as to how these 
can be so connected with each other according to settled laws 
that they exhibit the unity of a coherent experience. 

As long as we take inner and outer appearances together 
as mere representations in experience, we find nothing absurd 



3$6 KANTS CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

and strange in the association 1 of the two kinds of senses. But 
as soon as we hypostatise outer appearances and come to re- 
gard them not as representations but as things existing by them- 
selves outside us, with the same quality as that with which they 
exist in us, and as bringing to bear on our thinking subject the 
activities which they exhibit as appearances in relation to each 
other, then the efficient causes outside us assume a character 
which is irreconcilable with their effects in us. For the cause re- 
lates only to outer sense, the effect to inner sense senses which, 
although combined in one subject, are extremely unlike each 
other. In outer sense we find no other outer effects save changes 
of place, and no forces except mere tendencies which issue in 
spatial relations as their effects. Within us, on the other hand, 

A 387 the effects are thoughts, among which is not to be found any 
relation of place, motion, shape, or other spatial determina- 
tion, and we altogether lose the thread of the causes in the 
effects to which they are supposed to have given rise in inner 
sense. We ought, however, to bear in mind that bodies are 
not objects in themselves which are present to us, but a mere 
appearance of we know not what unknown object; that motion 
is not the effect of this unknown cause, but only the appearance 
of its influence on our senses Neither bodies nor motions are 
anything outside us; both alike are mere representations in us; 
and it is not, therefore, the motion of matter that produces re- 
presentations in us; the motion itself is representation only, as 
also is the matter which makes itself known in this way. Thus 
in the end the whole difficulty which we have made for our- 
selves comes to this, how and why the representations of our 
sensibility are so interconnected that those which we entitle 
outer intuitions can be represented according to empirical 
laws as objects outside us a question which is not in any 
way bound up with the supposed difficulty of explaining 
the origin of our representations from quite heterogeneous 
efficient causes outside us. That difficulty has arisen from 
our taking the appearances of an unknown cause as being 
the cause itself outside us, a view which can result in no- 
thing but confusion. In the case of judgments in which a 
misapprehension has taken deep root through long custom, 

A 388 it is impossible at once to give to their correction that clarity 

1 \Gemeinschaft.} 



PARALOGISMS OF PURE REASON (A) 357 

which can be achieved in other cases where no such inevitable 
illusion confuses the concept. Our freeing of reason from 
sophistical theories can hardly, therefore, at this stage have 
the clearness which is necessary for its complete success. 

The following comments will, I think, be helpful as contri- 
buting towards this ultimate clarity. 

All objections can be divided into dogmatic, critical, and 
sceptical. A dogmatic objection is directed against a proposi- 
tion, a critical objection against the proof of a proposition. 
The former requires an insight into the nature of the object 
such that we can maintain the opposite of what the proposi- 
tion has alleged in regard to this object. It is therefore itself 
dogmatic, claiming acquaintance with the constitution of the 
object fuller than that of the counter-assertion. A critical objec- 
tion, since it leaves the validity or invalidity of the proposition 
unchallenged, and assails only the proof, does not presuppose 
fuller acquaintance with the object or oblige us to claim 
superior knowledge of its nature; it shows only that the asser- 
tion is unsupported, not that it is wrong. A sceptical objec- 
tion sets assertion and counter-assertion in mutual opposition 
to each other as having equal weight, treating each in turn as 
dogma and the other as the objection thereto. And the con- 
flict, as the being thus seemingly dogmatic on both the oppos- A 389 
ing sides, is taken as showing that all judgment in regard 
to the object is completely null and void. Thus dogmatic 
and sceptical objections alike lay claim to such insight into 
their object as is required to assert or to deny something in 
regard to it. A critical objection, on the other hand, confines 
itself to pointing out that in the making of the assertion some- 
thing has been presupposed that is void and merely fictitious; 
and it thus overthrows the theory by removing its alleged 
foundation without claiming to establish anything that 
bears directly upon the constitution of the object. 

So long as we hold to the ordinary concepts of our 
reason with regard to the communion in which our thinking 
subject stands with the things outside us, we are dogmatic, 
looking upon them as real objects existing independently of 
us, in accordance with a certain transcendental dualism which 
does not assign these outer appearances to the subject as 
representations, but sets them, just as they are given us in 



358 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

sensible intuition, as objects outside us, completely separ- 
ating them from the thinking subject. This subreption is 
the basis of all theories in regard to the communion between 
soul and body. The objective reality thus assigned to ap- 
pearances is never brought into question. On the contrary, 
it is taken for granted; the theorising is merely as to the 
mode in which it has to be explained and understood. There 

A 390 are three usual systems devised on these lines, and they are 
indeed the only possible systems : that of physical influence, 
that of predetermined harmony ', and that of supernatural 
intervention. 

The two last methods of explaining the communion be- 
tween the soul and matter are based on objections to the first 
view, which is that of common sense. It is argued, namely, that 
what appears as matter cannot by its immediate influence be 
the cause of representations, these being effects which are 
quite different in kind from matter. Now those who take this 
line cannot attach to what they understand by 'object of outer 
senses' the concept of a matter which is nothing but ap- 
pearance, and so itself a mere representation produced by 
some sort of outer objects. For in that case they would be say- 
ing that the representations of outer objects (appearances) can- 
not be outer causes of the representations in our mind; and 
this would be a quite meaningless objection, since no one could 
dream of holding that what he has once come to recognise as 
mere representation, is an outer cause. On our principles they 
can establish their theory only by showing that that which is 
the true (transcendental) object of our outer senses cannot be 
the cause of those representations (appearances) which we 

A 391 comprehend under the title 'matter'. No one, however, can 
have the right to claim that he knows anything in regard to the 
transcendental cause of our representations of the outer senses; 
and their assertion is therefore entirely groundless. If, on the 
other hand, those who profess to improve upon the doctrine of 
physical influence keep to the ordinary outlook of transcend- 
ental dualism, and suppose matter, as such, to be a thing-in- 
itself (not the mere appearance of an unknown thing), they will 
direct their objection to showing that such an outer object, 
which in itself exhibits no causality save that of movements, 
can never be the efficient cause of representations, but that a 



PARALOGISMS OF PURE REASON (A) 359 

third entity must intervene to establish, if not reciprocal inter- 
action, at least correspondence and harmony between the two. 
But in arguing in this way, they begin their refutation by ad- 
mitting into their dualism the Trpwrov ^eOSo? of [a doctrine of] 
physical influence, and consequently their objection is not so 
much a disproof of natural influence as of their own dualistic 
presupposition. For the difficulties in regard to the connection 
of our thinking nature with matter have their origin, one and 
all, in the illicitly assumed dualistic view, that matter as such 
is not appearance, that is, a mere representation of the mind 
to which an unknown object corresponds, but is the object in 
itself as it exists outside us independently of all sensibility. 

As against the commonly accepted doctrine of physical in- A 392 
fluence, an objection of the dogmatic type is not, therefore, 
practicable. For if the opponent of the doctrine accepts the 
view that matter and its motion are mere appearances and so 
themselves mere representations, his difficulty is then simply 
this, that it is impossible that the unknown object of our sensi- 
bility should be the cause of the representations in us. He can- 
not, however, have the least justification for any such conten- 
tion, since no one is in a position to decide what an unknown 
object may or may not be able to do. And this transcendental 
idealism, as we have just proved, he cannot but concede. His 
only way of escape would be frankly to hypostatise representa- 
tions, and to set them outside himself as real things . 

The doctrine of physical influence, in its ordinary form, 
is, however, subject to a well-founded critical objection. The 
alleged communion between two kinds of substances, the 
thinking and the extended, rests on a crude dualism, and 
treats the extended substances, which are really nothing 
but mere representations of the thinking subject, as existing 
by themselves. This mistaken interpretation of physical in- 
fluence can thus be effectively disposed of: we have shown 
that the proof of it is void and illicit. 

The much-discussed question of the communion between 
the thinking and the extended, if we leave aside all that is merely A 393 
fictitious, comes then simply to this: how in a thinking sub- 
ject outer intuition^ namely, that of space, with its filling-in of 
figure and motion, is possible. And this is a question which no 
human being can possibly answer. This gap in our knowledge 



360 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

can never be filled; all that can be done is to indicate it through 
the ascription of outer appearances to that transcendental ob- 
ject which is the cause of this species of representations, but of 
which we can have no knowledge whatsoever and of which we 
shall never acquire any concept. In all problems which may 
arise in the field of experience we treat these appearances as 
objects in themselves, without troubling ourselves about the 
primary ground of their possibility (as appearances). But to 
advance beyond these limits the concept of a transcendental 
object would be indispensably required. 

The settlement of all disputes or objections which concern 
the state of the thinking nature prior to this communion (prior 
to life), or after the cessation of such communion (in death), 
rests upon these considerations regarding the communion 
between thinking beings and extended beings. The opinion 
that the thinking subject has been capable of thought prior to 
any communion with bodies would now appear as an assertion 
that, prior to the beginning of the species of sensibility in 
A 394 virtue of which something appears to us in space, those tran- 
scendental objects, which in our present state appear as bodies, 
could have been intuited in an entirely different manner. The 
opinion that the soul after the cessation of all communion with 
the corporeal world could still continue to think, would be 
formulated as the view that, if that species of sensibility, in 
virtue of which transcendental objects, at present quite un- 
known to us, appear as a material world, should cease, all in- 
tuition of the transcendental objects would not for that reason 
be removed, and it would still be quite possible that those same 
unknown objects should continue to be known by the thinking 
subject, though no longer, indeed, in the quality of bodies 

Now on speculative principles no one can give the least 
ground for any such assertion. Even the possibility of what is 
asserted cannot be established; it can only be assumed. But it 
is equally impossible for anyone to bring any valid dogmatic 
objection against it. For whoever he may be, he knows just as 
little of the absolute, inner cause of outer corporeal appear- 
ances as I or anybody else. Since he cannot, therefore, offer 
any justification for claiming to know on what the outer ap- 
pearances in our present state (that of life) really rest, 
neither can he know that the condition of all outer intui- 



PARALOGISMS OF PURE REASON (A) 361 

tion, or the thinking subject itself, will cease with this state A 395 
(in death). 

Thus all controversy in regard to the nature of the thinking 
being and its connection with the corporeal world is merely a re- . 
suit of filling the gap where knowledge is wholly lacking to us 
with paralogisms of reason, treating our thoughts as things and 
hypostatising them. Hence originates an imaginary science, 
imaginary both in the case of him who affirms and of him 
who denies, since all parties either suppose some knowledge 
of objects of which no human being has any concept, or treat 
their own representations as objects, and so revolve in a per- 
petual circle of ambiguities and contradictions. Nothing but 
the sobriety of a critique, at once strict and just, can free us from 
this dogmatic delusion, which through the lure of an imagined 
felicity keeps so many in bondage to theories and systems. 
Such a critique confines all our speculative claims rigidly to 
the field of possible experience; and it does this not by shallow 
scoffing at ever-repeated failures or pious sighs over the limits 
of our reason, but by an eifective determining of these limits 
in accordance with established principles, inscribing its nihil 
ulterius on those Pillars of Hercules which nature herself has 
erected in order that the voyage of our reason may be ex- 
tended no further than the continuous coastline of experience A 396 
itself reaches a coast we cannot leave without venturing 
upon a shoreless ocean which, after alluring us with ever- 
deceptive prospects, compels us in the end to abandon as 
hopeless all this vexatious and tedious endeavour. 



We still owe the reader a clear general exposition of the 
transcendental and yet natural illusion in the paralogisms of 
pure reason, and also a justification of the systematic ordering 
of them which runs parallel with the table of the categories. 
We could not have attempted to do so at the beginning of this 
section without running the risk of becoming obscure or of 
clumsily anticipating the course of our argument. We shall 
now try to fulfil this obligation. 

All illusion may be said to consist in treating the subjective 
condition of thinking as being knowledge of the object. Further 
in the Introduction to the Transcendental Dialectic we have 



362 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

shown that pure reason concerns itself solely with the totality 
of the synthesis of the conditions, for a given conditioned. Now 
since the dialectical illusion of pure reason cannot be an em- 
pirical illusion, such as occurs in certain specific instances of 
empirical knowledge, it will relate to what is universal in the 
conditions of thinking, and there will therefore be only three 
A 397 cases of the dialectical employment of pure reason. 

1. The synthesis of the conditions of a thought in general. 

2. The synthesis of the conditions of empirical thinking. 

3. The synthesis of the conditions of pure thinking. 

In all these three cases pure reason occupies itself only 
with the absolute totality of this synthesis, that is, with that 
condition which is itself unconditioned. On this division is 
founded the threefold transcendental illusion which gives 
occasion for the three main sections of the Dialectic, and for 
the three pretended sciences of pure reason transcendental 
psychology, cosmology, and theology. Here we are concerned 
only with the first. 

Since, in thinking in general, we abstract from all relation 
of the thought to any object (whether of the senses or of the 
pure understanding), the synthesis of the conditions of a 
thought in general (No. i) is not objective at all, but merely a 
synthesis of the thought with the subject, 1 which is mistaken 
for a synthetic representation of an object. 

It follows from this that the dialectical inference to the 
condition 2 of all thought in general, which is itself uncon- 
ditioned, does not commit a material 3 error (for it abstracts 
A 398 from all content or objects), but is defective in form alone, and 
must therefore be called a paralogism. 

Further, since the one condition which accompanies all 
thought is the T in the universal proposition 'I think', 
reason has to deal with this condition in so far as it is itself 
unconditioned. It is only the formal condition, namely, the 
logical unity of every thought, in which I abstract from all 
objects; but nevertheless it is represented as an object which I 
think, namely, I myself and its unconditioned unity. 

If anyone propounds to me the question, 'What is the con- 

1 \blos eine Synthesis des Gedankens mit dem Subjeki.] 
* [Reading Bedingung for Bedingungen,} 8 \im Inhalte.} 



PARALOGISMS OF PURE REASON (A) 363 

stitution 1 of a thing which thinks?', I have no a priori know- 
ledge wherewith to reply. For the answer has to be synthetic 
an analytic answer will perhaps explain what is meant by 
thought, but beyond this cannot yield any knowledge of that 
upon which this thought depends for its possibility. For a 
synthetic solution, however, intuition is always required; and 
owing to the highly general character of the problem, intuition 
has been left entirely out of account. Similarly no one can answer 
in all its generality the question, 'What must a thing be, to be 
movable?' For the question contains no trace of the answer, 
viz. impenetrable extension (matter). But although I have no 
general answer to the former question, it still seems as if I 
could reply in the special case of the proposition which ex- 
presses self-consciousness 'I think'. For this T is the primary A 399 
subject, that is, substance; it is simple, etc. But these would 
then have to be propositions derived from experience, and in 
the absence of a universal rule which expresses the conditions 
of the possibility of thought in general and a priori, they could 2 
not contain any such non-empirical predicates. Suspicion is 
thus thrown on the view, which at first seemed to me so 
plausible, that we can form judgments about the nature of a 
thinking being, and can do so from concepts alone. But the 
error in this way of thinking has not yet been detected. 

Further investigation into the origin of the attributes which 
I ascribe to myself as a thinking being in general can, however, 
show in what the error consists. These attributes are nothing 
but pure categories, by which I do not think a determinate ob- 
ject but only the unity of the representations in order to deter- 
mine an object for them. In the absence of an underlying intui- 
tion the category cannot by itself yield a concept of an object; for 
by intuition alone is the object given, which thereupon is thought 
in accordance with the category. If I am to declare a thing to 
be a substance in the [field of] appearance, predicates of its in- 
tuition must first be given me, and I must be able to distinguish 
in these the permanent from the transitory and the substratum 
(the thing itself) from what is merely inherent in it. If I call a A 400 
thing in the [field of] appearance simple, I mean by this that 
the intuition of it, although a part of the appearance, is not 

1 [Beschaffenheit.] 
* [Reading, with Wille, konnten for konntc.} 



364 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

itself capable of being divided into parts, etc. But if I know 
something as simple in concept only and not in the [field of] 
appearance, I have really no knowledge whatsoever of the 
object, but only of the concept which I make for myself of a 
something in general that does not allow of being intuited. I 
say that I think something as completely simple, only because 
I have really nothing more to say of it than merely that it is 
something. 

Now the bare apperception, T, is in concept substance, in 
concept simple, etc.; and in this sense all those psychological 
doctrines are unquestionably true. Yet this does not give us 
that knowledge of the soul for which we are seeking. For since 
none of these predicates are valid of intuition, they cannot 
have any consequences which are applicable to objects of 
experience, and are therefore entirely void. The concept of 
substance does not teach me that the soul endures by itself, 
nor that it is a part of outer intuitions which cannot itself be 
divided into parts, and cannot therefore arise or perish by any 
natural alterations. These are properties which would make 
the soul known to me in the context of experience and might 
A 401 reveal something concerning its origin and future state. But 
if I say, in terms of the 1 mere category, 'The soul is a simple 
substance', it is obvious that since the bare concept of sub- 
stance (supplied by the understanding) contains nothing be- 
yond the requirement that a thing be represented as being 
subject in itself, and not in turn predicate of anything else, 
nothing follows from this as regards the permanence of the 
T, and the attribute 'simple' certainly does not aid in adding 
this permanence. Thus, from this source, we learn nothing 
whatsoever as to what may happen to the soul in the changes 
of the natural world. If we could be assured that the soul is a 
simple part of matter ', we could use this knowledge, with the 
further assistance of what experience teaches in this regard, to 
deduce the permanence, and, as involved in its simple nature, 
the indestructibility of the soul. But of all this, the concept 
of the T, in the psychological principle 'I think', tells us 
nothing. 

That the being which thinks in us is under the impression 
that it knows itself through pure categories, and precisely 

1 [Reading, with Rosenkranz, die blosse for blosse^ 



PARALOGISMS OF PURE REASON (A) 365 

through those categories which in each type of category 1 
express absolute unity, is due to the following reason. Apper- 
ception is itself the ground of the possibility of the categories, 
which on their part represent nothing but the synthesis of the 
manifold of intuition, in so far as the manifold has unity in 
apperception. Self-consciousness in general is therefore the 
representation of that which is the condition of all unity, and 
itself is unconditioned. We can thus say of the thinking T 
(the soul) which regards itself as substance, as simple, as A 402 
numerically identical at all times, and as the correlate of all 
existence, from which all other existence must be inferred, 
that it does not know itself through the categories &gt; but knows 
the categories, and through them all objects, in the absolute 
unity of apperception, and so through itself. Now it is, in- 
deed, very evident that I cannot know as an object that which 
I must presuppose in order to know any object, and that the 
determining self (the thought) is distinguished from the self 
that is to be determined (the thinking subject) in the same 
way as knowledge is distinguished from its object. Neverthe- 
less there is nothing more natural and more misleading than 
the illusion which leads us to regard the unity in the synthesis 
of thoughts as a perceived unity in the subject of these thoughts. 
We might call it the subreption of the hypostatised conscious- 
ness (apperceptionis* substantiatae). 

If we desire to give a logical title to the paralogism con- 
tained in the dialectical syllogisms of the rational doctrine of 
the soul, then in view of the fact that their premisses are cor- 
rect, we may call it a sophisma figurae dictionis? Whereas the 
major premiss, in dealing with the condition, makes a merely 
transcendental use of the category, the minor premiss and the 
conclusion, in dealing with the soul which has been subsumed 
under this condition, use the same category empirically. Thus, 
for instance, in the paralogism of substantiality, 4 the con- A 403 
cept of substance is a pure intellectual concept, which in the 
absence of the conditions of sensible intuition admits only of 
transcendental use, that is, admits of no use whatsoever. But in 
the minor premiss the very same concept is applied to the object 

1 \unterjedem Titel derselben.] 

a [Reading, with Hartenstein, apperceptionis for apperceptiones.} 

8 [i.e. of ambiguous middle.] 

4 [Reading, with Adickes, Substanzialit&amp;t for Simplizitat.} 



366 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

of all inner experience without our having first ascertained 
and established the condition of such employment in concrete, 
namely, the permanence of this object. We are thus making an 
empirical, but in this case inadmissible, employment of the 
category. 1 

Finally, in order to show the systematic interconnection of 
all these dialectical assertions of a pseudo-rational doctrine of 
the soul in an order determined by pure reason, and so to show 
that we have them in their completeness, we may note that 
apperception has been carried through all the classes of the 
categories but only in reference to those concepts of under- 
standing which in each class form the basis of the unity of the 
others in a possible perception, namely, subsistence, reality, 
unity (not plurality), and existence. Reason here represents all 
of these as conditions, which are themselves unconditioned, of 
the possibility of a thinking being. Thus the soul knows in 
itself 

A 404 (i) the unconditioned unity of relation, i.e. that it itself is not 
inherent [in something else] but self-subsistent. 

(2) the unconditioned unity of quality, that is, that it is net a 

real whole but simple? 

(3) the unconditioned unity in the plurality in time, i.e. that 

it is not numerically different at different times but one 
and the very same subject. 

(4) the unconditioned unity of existence in space, i.e. that it 

is not the consciousness of many things outside it, but 
the consciousness of the existence of itself only, and of 
other things merely as its representations. 

A 405 Reason is the faculty of principles. The assertions of pure 
psychology do not contain empirical predicates of the soul but 
those predicates, if there be any such, which are meant to de- 
termine the object in itself independently of experience, and 
so by mere reason. They ought, therefore, to be founded on 
principles and universal concepts bearing on the nature of 



a How the simple here again corresponds to the category of 
reality I am not yet in a position to explain. This will be shown in 
the next chapter on the occasion of this same concept being put by 
reason to yet another use. 

1 [For a more consistent account of the nature of paralogism cf. B 410-411.] 



PARALOGISMS OF PURE REASON (A) 367 

thinking beings in general. But instead we find that the single 
representation, 'I am', governs them all. This representation 
just because it expresses the pure formula of all my experience 
in general 1 announces itself as a universal proposition valid 
for all thinking beings; and since it is at the same time in all 
respects unitary, it carries with it the illusion of an absolute 
unity of the conditions of thought in general, and so extends 
itself further than possible experience can reach. 

1 [unbestimmt.] 



THE PARALOGISMS OF PURE REASON 1 
[AS RESTATED IN SECOND EDITION] 

SINCE 2 the proposition 'I think' (taken problematically) con- 
tains the form of each and every judgment of understanding 
and accompanies all categories as their vehicle, it is evident 
that the inferences from it admit only of a transcendental em- 
ployment of the understanding. And since this employment 
excludes any admixture of experience, we cannot, after what 
has been shown above, entertain any favourable anticipations 
in regard to its methods of procedure. We therefore propose to 
follow it, with a critical eye, through all the predicaments of 
pure psychology. But for the sake of brevity the examination 
had best proceed in an unbroken continuity. 

The following general remark may, at the outset, aid us in 
our scrutiny of this kind of argument. I do not know an object 
merely in that I think, but only in so far as I determine a given 
intuition with respect to the unity of consciousness in which all 
thought consists. Consequently, I do not know myself through 
being conscious of myself as thinking, but only when I am con- 
scious of the 3 intuition of myself as determined with respect 
to the function of thought. Modi of self-consciousness in 
B 407 thought are not by themselves concepts of objects (categories), 
but are mere functions which do not give thought an object 
to be known, and accordingly do not give even myself as 
object. The object is not the consciousness of the determining 
self, but only that 4 of the determinate self, that is, of my 
inner intuition (in so far as its manifold can be combined in 
accordance with the universal condition of the unity of apper- 
ception in thought). 

1 [What follows, up to p. 383, is Kant's restatement of the Paralogisms, in B.] 
8 [In sequence to p. 332, above.] 8 [Reading, with Grillo, der for die.] 

4 [Reading, with Hartenstein, das for die.] 

368 



PARALOGISMS OF PURE REASON (B) 369 

(1) In all judgments I am the determining subject of that 
relation which constitutes the judgment. That the T, the T 
that thinks, can be regarded always as subject &gt; and as something 
which does not belong to thought as a mere predicate, must be 
granted. It is an apodeictic and indeed identical proposition; 
but it does not mean that I, as object , am for myself a self- 
subsistent being or substance. The latter statement goes very far 
beyond the former, and demands for its proof data which are 
not to be met with in thought, and perhaps (in so far as I have 
regard to the thinking self merely as such) are more than I 
shall ever find in it. 

(2) That the T of apperception, and therefore the T in 
every act of thought, is one?- and cannot be resolved into a 
plurality of subjects, and consequently signifies a logically 
simple subject, is something already contained in the very 
concept of thought, and is therefore an analytic proposition. 

But this does not mean that the thinking T is a simple sub- B 408 
stance. That proposition would be synthetic. The concept of 
substance always relates to intuitions which cannot in me be 
other than sensible, and which therefore lie entirely outside 
tne field of the understanding and its thought. But it is of 
this thought that we are speaking when we say that the T in 
thought is simple. It would, indeed, be surprising if what in 
other cases requires so much labour to determine namely, 
what, of all that is presented in intuition, is substance, and 
further, whether this substance can be simple (e.g. in the 
parts of matter) should be thus given me directly, as if by 
revelation, in the poorest of all representations. 

(3) The proposition, that in all the manifold of which I am 
conscious I am identical with myself, is likewise implied in the 
concepts themselves, and is therefore an analytic proposition. 
But this identity of the subject, of which I can be conscious in 
all my 2 representations, does not concern any intuition of the 
subject, whereby it is given as object, and cannot therefore 
signify the identity of the person, if by that is understood the 
consciousness of the identity of one's own substance, as a 
thinking being, in all change of its states. No mere analysis of 
the proposition 'I think' will suffice to prove such a proposi- 

1 \ein Singular.] 
2 [Reading, with Erdmann, meinen for seinen.] 

2B 



370 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

B 409 tion; for that we should require various synthetic judgments, 
based upon given intuition. 

(4) That I distinguish my own existence as that of a 
thinking being, from other things outside me among them 
my body is likewise an analytic proposition; for other things 
are such as I think to be distinct from myself. But I do not 
thereby learn whether this consciousness of myself would be 
even possible apart from things outside me through which 
representations are given to me, and whether, therefore, I 
could exist merely as thinking being (i.e. without existing in 
human form). 

The analysis, then, of the consciousness of myself in 
thought in general, yields nothing whatsoever towards the 
knowledge of myself as object. The logical exposition of 
thought in general has been mistaken for a metaphysical 
determination of the object. 

Indeed, it would be a great stumbling-block, or rather 
would be the one unanswerable objection, to our whole cri- 
tique, if there were a possibility of proving a priori that all 
thinking beings are in themselves simple substances, and that 
consequently (as follows from this same mode of proof) per- 
sonality is inseparable from them, and that they are conscious 
of their existence as separate and distinct from all matter. 
For by such procedure we should have taken a step beyond 
the world of sense, and have entered into the field of noumena; 
B 410 and no one could then deny our right of advancing yet further 
in this domain, indeed of settling in it, and, should our star 
prove auspicious, of establishing claims to permanent posses- 
sion. The proposition, 'Every thinking being is, as such, a 
simple substance*, is a synthetic a priori proposition; it is syn- 
thetic in that it goes beyond the concept from which it starts, 
and adds to the thought in general [i.e. to the concept of 
a thinking being] the mode of [its] existence: it is a priori, 
in that it adds to the concept a predicate (that of simplicity) 
which cannot be given in any experience. It would then follow 
that a priori synthetic propositions are possible and admis- 
sible, not only, as we have asserted, in relation to objects of 
possible experience, and indeed as principles of the possibility 
of this experience, but that they are applicable to things in 
general and to things in themselves a result that would make 



PARALOGISMS OF PURE REASON (B) 371 

an end of our whole critique, and would constrain us to ac- 
quiesce in the old-time procedure. Upon closer consideration 
we find, however, that there is no such serious danger. 

The whole procedure of rational psychology is determined 
by a paralogism, which is exhibited in the following syllogism: 

That which cannot be thought otherwise than as subject 
does not exist otherwise than as subject ', and is therefore 
substance. 

A thinking being, considered merely as such, cannot be 6411 
thought otherwise than as subject. 

Therefore it exists also only as subject, that is, as substance. 

In the major premiss we speak of a being that can be 
thought in general, in every relation, and therefore also as it 
may be given in intuition. But in the minor premiss we speak 
of it only in so far as it regards itself, as subject, simply in 
relation to thought and the unity of consciousness, and not as 
likewise in relation to the intuition through which it 1 is given 
as object to thought. Thus the conclusion is arrived at fallaci- 
ously, per sophisma figurae dictionis. a 

That we are entirely right in resolving this famous argu- B 412 
ment into a paralogism will be clearly seen, if we call to mind 
what has been said in the General Note to the Systematic 
Representation of the Principles and in the Section on Nou- 
mena. For it has there been proved that the concept of a thing 

'Thought' is taken in the two premisses in totally different 
senses: in the major premiss, as relating to an object in general and 
therefore to an object as it may be given in intuition; in the minor 
premiss, only as it consists in relation to self-consciousness. In 
this latter sense, no object whatsoever is being thought; all that is 
being represented is simply the relation to self as subject (as the 
form of thought). In the former premiss we are speaking of things 
which cannot be thought otherwise than as subjects; but in the latter 
premiss we speak not of things but of thought (abstraction being B 412 
made from all objects) in which the T always serves as the subject 
of consciousness. The conclusion cannot, therefore, be, 'I cannot 
exist otherwise than as subject', but merely, 'In thinking my exist- 
ence, I cannot employ myself, save as subject of the judgment 
[therein involved]'. This is an identical proposition, and casts no 
light whatsoever upon the mode of my existence. 

1 [Reading, with Vorlander, es for sfe.] 



372 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

which can exist by itself as subject and never as mere predi- 
cate, carries with it no objective reality; in other words, that we 
cannot know whether there is any object to which the concept 
is applicable as to the possibility of such a mode of existence 
we have no means of deciding and that the concept 1 therefore 
yields no knowledge whatsoever. If by the term 'substance' be 
meant an object which can be given, and if it is to yield know- 
ledge, it must be made to rest on a permanent intuition, as 
being that through which alone the object of our concept can 
be given, and as being, therefore, the indispensable condition 
B 413 of the objective reality of the concept. Now in inner intuition 
there is nothing permanent, for the T is merely the conscious- 
ness of my thought. So long, therefore, as we do not go beyond 
mere thinking, we are without the necessary condition for 
applying the concept of substance, that is, of a self-subsistent 
subject, to the self as a thinking being. And with the objective 
reality of the concept of substance, the allied concept of 
simplicity likewise vanishes; it is transformed into a merely 
logical qualitative unity of self-consciousness in thought in 
general, which has to be present whether the subject be com- 
posite or not. 

REFUTATION OF MENDELSSOHN'S 2 PROOF OF THE 
PERMANENCE OF THE SOUL 

This acute philosopher soon noticed that the usual argu- 
ment by which it is sought to prove that the soul if it be 
admitted to be a simple being cannot cease to be through 
dissolution^ is insufficient for its purpose, that of proving the 
necessary continuance of the soul, since it may be supposed 
to pass out of existence through simply vanishing. In his 
Phaedo he endeavoured to prove that the soul cannot be 
subject to such a process of vanishing, which would be a 
true annihilation, by showing that a simple being cannot 
cease to exist. His argument is that since the soul cannot 
be diminished, and so gradually lose something of its exist- 
B 414 ence, being by degrees changed into nothing (for since it 
has no parts, it has no multiplicity in itself), there would be 

1 [Reading, with Erdmann, er for es.] 

2 [Moses Mendelssohn (1729-86): Phddon (1767) (Gesammelte Schrijten, 
1843, " P- 151 #')] 



PARALOGISMS OF PURE REASON (B) 373 

no time between a moment in which it is and another in which 
it is not which is impossible. He failed, however, to observe 
that even if we admit the simple nature of the soul, namely, 
that it contains no manifold of constituents external to one 
another, and therefore no extensive quantity, we yet cannot 
deny to it, any more than to any other existence, intensive 
quantity, that is, a degree of reality in respect of all its facul- 
ties, nay, in respect of all that constitutes its existence, and 
that this degree of reality may diminish through all the in- 
finitely many smaller degrees. In this manner the supposed 
substance the thing, the permanence of which has not yet 
been proved may be changed into nothing, not indeed by 
dissolution, but by gradual loss (remissio) of its powers, and 
so, if I may be permitted the use of the term, by elanguescence. 
For consciousness itself has always a degree, which always 
allows of diminution," and the same must also hold of the 
faculty of being conscious of the self, and likewise of all the B 415 
other faculties. Thus the permanence of the soul, regarded 
merely as object of inner sense, remains undemonstrated, and 
indeed indemonstrable. Its permanence during life is, of course, 
evident per se, 1 since the thinking being (as man) is itself like- 
wise an object of the outer senses. But this is very far from 
satisfying the rational psychologist who undertakes to prove 
from mere concepts its absolute permanence beyond this life. b 

Clearness is not, as the logicians assert, the consciousness of 
a representation. A certain degree of consciousness, though it be 
insufficient for recollection, must be met with even in many obscure 
representations, since in the absence of all consciousness we should 
make no distinction between different combinations of obscure repre- B 415 
sentations, which yet we are able to do in respect of the characters 
of many concepts, such as those of right or equity, or as when the 
musician in improvising strikes several keys at once. But a repre- 
sentation is clear, when the consciousness suffices for the conscious- 
ness of the distinction of this representation from others. If it suffices 
for distinguishing, but not for consciousness of the distinction, the 
representation must still be entitled obscure. There are therefore 
infinitely many degrees of consciousness, down to its complete 
vanishing. 

6 Some philosophers, in making out a case for a new possibility, 
consider that they have done enough if they can defy others to show 

1 [fur sick klar ist.] 



374 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

B 416 If we take the above propositions in synthetic connec- 
tion, as valid for all thinking beings, as indeed they must 
be taken in the system of rational psychology, and proceed 
from the category of relation, with the proposition, 'All think- 

B 417 ing beings are, as such, substances', backwards through the 
series of the propositions, until the circle is completed, we 

any contradiction in their assumptions. This is the procedure * of all 
B 416 those who profess to comprehend the possibility of thought of 
which they have an example only in the empirical intuitions of our 
human life even after this life has ceased. But those who resort to 
such a method of argument can be quite nonplussed by the citation 
of other possibilities which are not a whit more adventurous. Such 
is the possibility of the division of a simple substance into several 
substances, and conversely the fusing together (coalition) of several 
into one simple substance. For although divisibility presupposes a 
composite, it does not necessarily require a composite of substances, 
but only of degrees (of the manifold powers) of one and the same sub- 
stance. Now just as we can think all powers and faculties of the soul, 
even that of consciousness, as diminished by one half, but in such a 
way that the substance still remains, so also, without contradiction, 
we can represent this extinguished half as being preserved, not in 
the soul, but outside it; and we can likewise hold that since every- 
thing which is real in it, and which therefore has a degree in other 
words, its entire existence, from which nothing is lacking has been 
halved, another separate substance would then come into existence 
outside it. For the multiplicity which has been divided existed 
before, not indeed as a multiplicity of substances, but as the multi- 
plicity of every reality proper to the substance, that is, of the quan- 
tum of existence in it; and the unity of substance was therefore only 
a mode of existence, which in virtue of this division has been trans- 
B 417 formed into a plurality of subsistence. Similarly, several simple sub- 
stances might be fused into one, without anything being lost except 
only the plurality of subsistence, inasmuch as the one substance 
would contain the degree of reality of all the former substances to- 
gether. We might perhaps also represent the simple substances which 
yield us the appearance [which we entitle] matter as producing not 
indeed by a mechanical or chemical influence upon one another, but 
by an influence unknown to us, of which the former influence would 
be merely the appearance the souls of children, that is, as pro- 
ducing them through such dynamical division of the parent souls, 
considered as intensive quantities, and those parent souls as making 
good their loss through coalition with new material of the same kind. 

1 [Reading, with Mellin, tun for sind.] 



PARALOGISMS OF PURE REASON (B) 375 

come at last to the existence^ of these thinking beings. Now in 
this system of rational psychology these beings are taken not 
only as being conscious of their existence independently of 
outer things, but as also being able, in and by themselves, to 
determine that existence in respect of the permanence which B 418 
is a necessary characteristic of substance. This rationalist sys- 
tem is thus unavoidably committed to idealism^ or at least to 
problematic idealism. For if the existence of outer things is 
not in any way required for determination of one's own 
existence in time, the assumption of their existence is a 
quite gratuitous assumption, of which no proof can ever be 
given. 

If, on the other hand, we should proceed analytically p , 
starting from the proposition 'I think', as a proposition that 
already in itself includes an existence as given, and therefore 
modality, and analysing it in order to ascertain its content, 
and so to discover whether and how this T determines its 
existence in space or time solely through that content, 2 then 
the propositions of the rational doctrine of the soul would not 
begin with the concept of a thinking being in general, but with 
a reality, and we should infer from the manner in which this 
reality is thought, after everything empirical in it has been 
removed, what it is that belongs to a thinking being in general. B 419 
This is shown in the following table: 

I am far from allowing any serviceableness or validity to such fancies; 
and as the principles of our Analytic have sufficiently demonstrated, 
no other than an empirical employment of the categories (including 
that of substance) is possible. But if the rationalist is bold enough, 
out of the mere faculty of thought, without any permanent intuition 
whereby an object might be given, to construct a self-subsistent being, 
and this merely on the ground that the unity of apperception in thought 
does not allow of its being explained [as arising] out of the composite, 
instead of admitting, as he ought to do, that he is unable to explain B 418 
the possibility of a thinking nature, 3 why should not the materialist, 
though he can as little appeal to experience in support of his [con- 
jectured] possibilities, be justified in being equally daring, and in 
using his principle to establish the opposite conclusion, while still 
preserving the formal unity upon which his opponent has relied. 

1 [Cf. above, p. 330. As there noted, Kant, in his private copy of the Critique, 
has changed 'The soul is substance' to 'The soul exists as substance'.] ' 
a \bloss dadurch.} 3 \einer denkenden Natur.] 



376 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

I. I think, 
2. as subject, 3. as simple subject, 

4. as identical subject 
in every state of my thought. 

In the second proposition it has not been determined 
whether I can exist and be thought as subject only, and not 
also as a predicate of another being, and accordingly the con- 
cept of a subject is here taken in a merely logical sense, and it 
remains undetermined whether or not we are to understand 
by it a substance. Similarly, the third proposition establishes 
nothing in regard to the constitution or subsistence of the sub- 
ject; none the less in this proposition the absolute unity of apper- 
ception, the simple T in the representation to which all com- 
bination or separation that constitutes thought relates, has its 
own importance. For apperception is something real, and its 
simplicity is already given in the mere fact of its possibility. 
Now in space there is nothing real which can be simple; points, 
which are the only simple things in space, are merely limits, 
not themselves anything that can as parts serve to constitute 
B 420 space. From this follows the impossibility of any explana- 
tion in materialist terms of the constitution of the self as a 
merely thinking subject. But since my existence is taken in 
the first proposition as given for it does not say that every 
thinking being exists, which would be to assert its absolute 
necessity and therefore to say too much, but only, '/ exist 
thinking' the proposition is empirical, and can determine 
my existence only in relation to my representations in time. 
But since for this purpose I again require something perma- 
nent, which, so far as I think myself, is in no way given to me 
in inner intuition, it is quite impossible, by means of this simple 
self-consciousness, to determine the manner in which I exist, 
whether it be as substance or as accident. Thus, if materialism 
is disqualified from explaining my existence, spiritualism is 
equally incapable of doing so; and the conclusion is that in no 
way whatsoever can we know anything of the constitution of 
the soul, so far as the possibility of its separate existence is 
concerned. 

How, indeed, should it be possible, by means of the unity 



PARALOGISMS OF PURE REASON (B) 377 

of consciousness which we only know because we cannot 
but make use of it, as indispensable for the possibility of 
experience to pass out beyond experience (our existence in 
this life), and even to extend our knowledge to the nature of 
all thinking beings in general, through the empirical, but in B 421 
respect of every sort of intuition the quite indeterminate pro- 
position, 'I think'? 

Rational psychology exists not as doctrine^ furnishing an 
addition to our knowledge of the self, but only as discipline. 
It sets impassable limits to speculative reason in this field, and 
thus keeps us, on the one hand, from throwing ourselves into 
the arms of a soulless materialism, or, on the other hand, from 
losing ourselves in a spiritualism which must be quite un- 
founded so long as we remain in this present life. But though 
it furnishes no positive doctrine, it reminds us that we should 
regard this refusal of reason to give satisfying response to our 
inquisitive probings into what is beyond the limits of this 
present life as reason's hint to divert our self-knowledge from 
fruitless and extravagant speculation to fruitful practical em- 
ployment. Though in such practical employment it is directed 
always to objects of experience only, it derives its principles 
from a higher source, and determines us to regulate our actions 
as if our destiny reached infinitely far beyond experience, and 
therefore far beyond this present life. 

From all this it is evident that rational psychology owes 
its origin simply to misunderstanding. The unity of conscious- 
ness, which underlies the categories, is here mistaken for an 
intuition of the subject as object, and the category of sub- 
stance is then applied to it. But this unity is only unity in B 422 
thought, by which alone no object is given, and to which, 
therefore, the category of substance, which always presup- 
poses a given intuition , cannot be applied. Consequently, this 
subject cannot be known. The subject of the categories cannot 
by thinking the categories acquire a concept of itself as an 
object of the categories. For in order to think them, its pure 
self-consciousness, which is what was to be explained, must 
itself be presupposed. Similarly, the subject, in which the re- 
presentation of time has its original ground, cannot thereby 
determine its own existence in time. And if this latter is im- 
possible, the former, as a determination of the self (as a 



378 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

thinking being in general) by means of the categories, is 
equally so. a 

B 423 Thus the expectation of obtaining knowledge which while 
extending beyond the limits of possible experience is like- 
wise to further the highest interests of humanity, is found, 
so far as speculative philosophy professes to satisfy it, to 

B 4 2 4 be grounded in deception, and to destroy itself in the attempt 
at fulfilment. Yet the severity of our criticism has rendered 
reason a not unimportant service in proving the impossibility 
of dogmatically determining, in regard to an object of experi- 
ence, anything that lies beyond the limits of experience. For in 
so doing it has secured reason against all possible assertions of 
the opposite. That cannot be achieved save in one or other 

a The *I think* is, as already stated, an empirical proposition, 
and contains within itself the proposition 'I exist'. But I cannot say 
'Everything which thinks, exists'. For in that case the property of 
thought would render all beings which possess it necessary beings. 
My existence cannot, therefore, be regarded as an inference from 
the proposition 'I think', as Descartes sought to contend for it 
would then have to be preceded by the major premiss 'Everything 
which thinks, exists' but is identical with it. The 'I think' ex- 
presses an indeterminate empirical intuition, i.e. perception (and 
B 423 thus shows that sensation, which as such belongs to sensibility, lies 
at the basis of this existential proposition). But the 'I think' 
precedes the experience which is required to determine the object 
of perception through the category in respect of time; and the 
existence here [referred to] is not a category. The category as 
such does not apply to an indeterminately given object but only to 
one of which we have a concept and about which we seek to know 
whether it does or does not exist outside the concept. An indetermin- 
ate perception here signifies only something real that is given, given 
indeed to thought in general, and so not as appearance, nor as thing 
in itself (noumenori), but as something which actually 1 exists, and 
which in the proposition, 'I think', is denoted 2 as such. For it must 
be observed, that when I have called the proposition, 'I think', an 
empirical proposition, I do not mean to say thereby, that the 'I' in 
this proposition is an empirical representation. On the contrary, 
it is purely intellectual, because belonging to thought in general. 
Without some empirical representation to supply the material for 
thought, the actus, 'I think', would not, indeed, take place; but the 
empirical is only the condition of the application, or of the employ- 
ment, of the pure intellectual faculty. 

1 [in der Tat.] * [bezeichnet.] 



PARALOGISMS OF PURE REASON (B) 379 

of two ways. Either we have to prove our proposition apo- 
deictically; or, if we do not succeed in this, we have to seek out 
the sources of this inability, which, if they are traceable to the 
necessary limits of our reason, must constrain all opponents 
to submit to this same law of renunciation in respect of all 
claims to dogmatic assertion. 

Yet nothing is thereby lost as regards the right, nay, the 
necessity, of postulating a future life in accordance with the 
principles of the practical employment of reason, which is 
closely bound up with its speculative employment. For the 
merely speculative proof has never been able to exercise any 
influence upon the ordinary reason of men. It so stands upon 
the point of a hair, that even the schools preserve it from fall- 
ing only so long as they keep it unceasingly spinning round 
like a top; even in their own eyes it yields no abiding founda- 
tion upon which anything could be built. The proofs which are 
serviceable for the world at large all preserve their entire value B 425 
undiminished, and indeed, upon the surrender of these dog- 
matic pretensions, gain in clearness and in natural force. For 
reason is then located in its own peculiar sphere, namely, the 
order of ends, which is also at the same time an order of nature; 
and since it is in itself not only a theoretical but also a practical 
faculty, and as such is not bound down to natural conditions, 
it is justified in extending the order of ends, and therewith our 
own existence, beyond the limits of experience and of life. If 
we judged according to analogy with the nature of living 
beings in this world, in dealing with which reason must 
necessarily accept the principle that no organ, no faculty, no 
impulse, indeed nothing whatsoever is either superfluous or 
disproportioned to its use, and that therefore nothing is pur- 
poseless, but everything exactly conformed to its destiny in 
life if we judged by such an analogy we should have to re- 
gard man, who alone can contain in himself the final end of 
all this order, as the only creature that is excepted from it. 
Man's natural endowments not merely his talents and the 
impulses to enjoy them, but above all else the moral law within 
him go so far beyond all the utility and advantage which he 
may derive from them in this present life, that he learns there- 
by to prize the mere consciousness of a righteous will as being, 
apart from all advantageous consequences, apart even from the B 426 



380 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

shadowy reward of posthumous fame, supreme over all other 
values; and so feels an inner call to fit himself, by his conduct 
in this world, and by the sacrifice of many of its advantages, 
for citizenship in a better world upon which he lays hold in 
idea. This powerful and incontrovertible proof is reinforced 
by our ever-increasing knowledge of purposiveness in all that 
we see around us, and by contemplation of the immensity of 
creation, and therefore also by the consciousness of a certain 
illimitableness in the possible extension of our knowledge, and 
of a striving commensurate therewith. All this still remains to 
us, but we must renounce the hope of comprehending, from 
the merely theoretical knowledge of ourselves, the necessary 
continuance of our existence. 



CONCLUSION, IN REGARD TO THE SOLUTION OF THE 
PSYCHOLOGICAL PARALOGISM 

The dialectical illusion in rational psychology arises from 
the confusion of an idea of reason the idea of a pure intelli- 
gence with the completely undetermined concept of a think- 
ing being in general. I think myself on behalf of a possible 
experience, at the same time abstracting from all actual ex- 
perience; and I conclude therefrom that I can be conscious of 
B 427 my existence even apart from experience and its empirical 
conditions. In so doing I am confusing the possible abstrac- 
tion from my empirically determined existence with the sup- 
posed consciousness of a possible separate existence of my 
thinking self, and I thus come to believe that I have knowledge 
that what is substantial in me is the transcendental subject. 
But all that I really have in thought is simply the unity of con- 
sciousness, on which, as the mere form of knowledge, all 
determination is based. 

The task of explaining the communion of the soul with 
the body does not properly belong to the psychology with 
which we are here dealing. For this psychology proposes to 
prove the personality of the soul even apart from this com- 
munion (that is, after death), and is therefore transcendent in 
the proper sense of that term. It does, indeed, occupy itself 
with an object of experience, but only in that aspect in which 1 

1 [nur sofern,] 



PARALOGISMS OF PURE REASON (B) 381 

it ceases to be an object of experience. Our teaching, on the 
other hand, does supply a sufficient answer to this question. 
The difficulty peculiar to the problem consists, as is generally 
recognised, in the assumed heterogeneity of the object of inner 
sense (the soul) and the objects of the outer senses, the formal 
condition of their intuition being, in the case of the former, time 
only, and in the case of the latter, also space. But if we consider 
that the two kinds of objects thus differ from each other, not in- 
wardly but only in so far as one appears outwardly to the other, 
and that what, as thing in itself, underlies the appearance of B 428 
matter, perhaps after all may not be so heterogeneous in 
character, this difficulty vanishes, the only question that re- 
mains being how in general a communion of substances is 
possible. This, however, is a question which lies outside the 
field of psychology, and which the reader, after what has been 
said in the Analytic regarding fundamental powers and facul- 
ties, will not hesitate to regard as likewise lying outside the 
field of all human knowledge. 

GENERAL NOTE ON THE TRANSITION FROM RATIONAL 
PSYCHOLOGY TO COSMOLOGY 

The proposition, 'I think' or 'I exist thinking', is an em- 
pirical proposition. Such a proposition, however, is conditioned 
by empirical intuition, and is therefore also conditioned by the 
object [that is, the self] which is thought [in its aspect] as 
appearance. It would consequently seem that on our theory 
the soul, even in thought, is completely transformed into 
appearance, and that in this way our consciousness itself, as 
being a mere illusion, 1 must refer in fact to nothing. 

Thought, taken by itself, is merely the logical function, 
and therefore the pure spontaneity of the combination of the 
manifold of a merely possible intuition, and does not exhibit 
the subject of consciousness as appearance; and this for the B 429 
sufficient reason that thought takes no account whatsoever of 
the mode of intuition, whether it be sensible or intellectual. I 
thereby represent myself to myself neither as I am nor as I 
appear to myself. I think myself only as I do any object in 
general from whose mode of intuition I abstract. If I here re- 

1 [Schein.] 



382 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

present myself as subject of thoughts or as ground of thought, 
these modes of representation do not signify the categories of 
substance or of cause. For the categories are those functions 
of thought (of judgment) as already applied to our sensible in- 
tuition, such intuition being required if I seek to know myself. 
If, on the other hand, I would be conscious of myself simply as 
thinking, then since I am not considering how my own self 1 
may be given in intuition, the self may be mere appearance to 
me, the T that thinks, but is no mere appearance in so far as 
I think; in the consciousness of myself in mere thought I am 
the being itself, although nothing in myself is thereby given 
for thought. 

The proposition, 'I think', in so far as it amounts to the 
assertion, '/ exist thinking* ', is no mere logical function, but 
determines the subject (which is then at the same time object) 
in respect of existence, and cannot take place without inner 
sense, the intuition of which presents the object not as thing in 
B 430 itself but merely as appearance. There is here, therefore, not 
simply spontaneity of thought, but also receptivity of intui- 
tion, that is, the thought of myself applied to the empirical 
intuition of myself. 2 Now it is to this intuition that the thinking 
self would have to look for the conditions of the employment 
of its logical functions as categories of substance, cause, etc., 
if it is not merely to distinguish itself as object in itself, through 
the T, but is also to determine the mode of its existence, that 
is, to know itself as noumenon. This, however, is impossible, 
since the inner empirical intuition is sensible and yields only 
data of appearance, which furnish nothing to the object of 
pure consciousness for the knowledge of its separate existence, 
but can serve only for the obtaining of experience. 

Should it be granted that we may in due course discover, 
not in experience but in certain laws of the pure employment 
of reason laws which are not merely logical rules, but which 
while holding a priori also concern our existence ground for 
regarding ourselves as legislating completely a priori in re- 
gard to our own existence, and as determining this existence, 
there would thereby be revealed a spontaneity through which 
our reality would be determinable, independently of the con- 
ditions of empirical intuition. And we should also become 
1 \mein eigenes Selbst,] a [ebendesselbcn Subjekts] 



PARALOGISMS OF PURE REASON (B) 383 

aware that in the consciousness of our existence there is con- 
tained a something a priori, which can serve to determine our 
existence the complete determination of which is possible B 431 
only in sensible terms as being related, in respect of a certain 
inner faculty, to a non-sensible intelligible world. 

But this would not be of the least service in furthering 
the attempts of rational psychology. In this marvellous faculty, 
which the consciousness of the moral law first reveals to me, I 
should indeed have, for the determination of my existence, a 
principle which is purely intellectual. But through what predi- 
cates would that determination have to be made? They could 
be no other than those which must be given to me in sensible 
intuition; and thus I should find myself, as regards rational 
psychology, in precisely the same position as before, namely, 
still in need of sensible intuitions to confer meaning on my 
concepts of understanding (substance, cause, etc.), through 
which alone I can have knowledge of myself; and these in- 
tuitions can never aid me in advancing beyond the field of 
experience. Nevertheless, in respect of the practical employ- 
ment, which is always directed to objects of experience, I 
should be justified in applying these concepts, in conformity 
with their analogical meaning when employed theoretically, 
to freedom and the subject that is possessed of freedom. In so 
doing, however, I should understand by these concepts the 
merely logical functions of subject and predicate, of ground 
and consequence, in accordance with which the acts or effects 
are so determined conformably to those [moral] laws, that B 432 
they always allow of being explained, together with the laws 
of nature, in accordance with the categories of substance and 
cause, although they have their source in an entirely different 
principle. These observations are designed merely to prevent 
a misunderstanding to which the doctrine of our self-intuition, 
as appearance, is particularly liable. We shall have occasion 
to make further application of them in the sequel. 



THE TRANSCENDENTAL DIALECTIC 

BOOK II 
CHAPTER II 

THE ANTINOMY OF PURE REASON 

WE have shown in the introduction to this part of our work 
that all transcendental illusion of pure reason rests on dia- 
lectical inferences whose schema is supplied by logic in the 

A 406 three formal species of syllogisms just as the categories find 
their logical schema in the four functions of all judgments. The 
first type of these pseudo-rational inferences deals with the 
unconditioned unity of the subjective conditions of all repre- 
sentations in general (of the subject or soul), in correspondence 
with the categorical syllogisms, the major premiss of which is 
a principle asserting the relation of a predicate to a subject. 

B 433 The second type of dialectical argument follows the analogy 
of the hypothetical syllogisms. It has as its content the un- 
conditioned unity of the objective conditions in the [field of] 
appearance. In similar fashion, the third type, which will be 
dealt with in the next chapter, has as its theme the un- 
conditioned unity of the objective conditions of the possibility 
of objects in general. 

But there is one point that calls for special notice. 
Transcendental paralogism produced a purely one-sided 
illusion in regard to the idea of the subject of our thought. 
No illusion which will even in the slightest degree support the 
opposing assertion is caused by the concepts of reason. Con- 
sequently, although transcendental paralogism, in spite of a 
favouring illusion, cannot disclaim the radical defect through 
which in the fiery ordeal of critical investigation it dwindles 

384 



ANTINOMY OF PURE REASON 385 

into mere semblance, such advantage as it offers is altogether 
on the side of pneumatism. 

A completely different situation arises when reason is ap- 
plied to the objective synthesis of appearances. For in this A 407 
domain, however it may endeavour to establish its principle 
of unconditioned unity, and though it indeed does so with 
great though illusory appearance of success, it soon falls into 
such contradictions that it is constrained, in this cosmological 
field, to desist from any such pretensions. 

We have here presented to us a new phenomenon of human 
reason an entirely natural antithetic, in which there is no 
need of making subtle enquiries or of laying snares for the 
unwary, but into which reason of itself quite unavoidably falls. B 434 
It certainly guards reason from the slumber of fictitious con- 
viction such as is generated by a purely one-sided illusion, but 
at the same time subjects it to the temptation either of aban- 
doning itself to a sceptical despair, or of assuming an ob- 
stinate attitude, dogmatically committing itself to certain 
assertions, and refusing to grant a fair hearing to the argu- 
ments for the counter-position. Either attitude is the death 
of sound philosophy, although the former might perhaps be 
entitled the euthanasia of pure reason. 

Before considering the various forms of opposition and 
dissension to which this conflict or antinomy of the laws of 
pure reason gives rise, we may offer a few remarks in explana- 
tion and justification of the method which we propose to 
employ in the treatment of this subject. I entitle all tran- 
scendental ideas, in so far as they refer to absolute totality in 
the synthesis of appearances, cosmical concepts, partly be- A 408 
cause this unconditioned totality also underlies the concept 
itself only an idea of the world-whole; partly because 
they concern only the synthesis of appearances, therefore 
only empirical synthesis. When, on the contrary, the abso- 
lute totality is that of the synthesis of the conditions of 
all possible things in general, it gives rise to an ideal of B 435 
pure reason which, though it may indeed stand in a certain 
relation to the cosmical concept, is quite distinct from it. 
Accordingly, just as the paralogisms of pure reason formed 
the basis of a dialectical psychology, so the antinomy of 
pure reason will exhibit to us the transcendental principles 

2C 



386 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

of a pretended pure rational cosmology. But it will not do 
so in order to show this science to be valid and to adopt it. 
As the title, conflict of reason, suffices to show, this pretended 
science can be exhibited only in its bedazzling but false 
illusoriness, as an idea which can never be reconciled with 
appearances. 



THE ANTINOMY OF PURE REASON 

Section I 
SYSTEM OF COSMOLOGICAL IDEAS 

In proceeding to enumerate these ideas with systematic 
precision according to a principle, we must bear in mind two 
points. In the first place we must recognise that pure and 
transcendental concepts can issue only from the understand- 

A 409 ing. Reason does not really generate any concept. The most 
it can do is to free a concept of understanding from the 
unavoidable limitations of possible experience, and so to en- 
deavour to extend it beyond the limits of the empirical, though 

B 436 still, indeed, in terms of its relation to the empirical. This is 
achieved in the following manner. For a given conditioned, 
reason demands on the side of the conditions to which as 
the conditions of synthetic unity the understanding subjects 
all appearances absolute totality, and in so doing converts 
the category into a transcendental idea. For only by carrying 
the empirical synthesis as far as the unconditioned is it en- 
abled to render it absolutely complete; and the unconditioned 
is never to be met with in experience, but only in the idea. 
Reason makes this demand in accordance with the principle 
that if the conditioned is given, the entire sum of conditions, 
and consequently the absolutely unconditioned (through which 
alone the conditioned has been possible) is also given. The 
transcendental ideas are thus, in the first place, simply cate- 
gories extended to the unconditioned, and can be reduced to 
a table arranged according to the [fourfold] headings of the 
latter. In the second place, not all categories are fitted for such 
employment, but only those in which the synthesis constitutes 
a series of conditions subordinated to, not co-ordinated with, 



ANTINOMY OF PURE REASON 387 

one another, and generative of a [given] conditioned. Ab- 
solute totality is demanded by reason only in so far as the 
ascending series of conditions relates to a given conditioned. A 410 
It is not demanded in regard to the descending line of con- 
sequences, nor in reference to the aggregate of co-ordinated 
conditions of these consequences. For in the case of the given B 437 
conditioned, conditions are presupposed, and are considered 
as given together with it. On the other hand, since conse- 
quences do not make their conditions possible, but rather 
presuppose them, we are not called upon, when we advance 
to consequences or descend from a given condition to the con- 
ditioned, to consider whether the series does or does not cease; 
the question as to the totality of the series is not in any way a 
presupposition of reason. 

Thus we necessarily think time as having completely 
elapsed up to the given moment, and as being itself given in 
this completed form. This holds true, even though such com- 
pletely elapsed time is not determinable by us. But since the 
future is not the condition of our attaining to the present, it is 
a matter of entire indifference, in our comprehension of the 
latter, how we may think of future time, whether as coming 
to an end or as flowing on to infinity. We have, as it were, the 
series m, n, o y in which n is given as conditioned by m, and 
at the same time as being the condition of o. The series ascends 
from the conditioned n to m (/, k, i t etc.), and also descends 
from the condition n to the conditioned o (p, g, r, etc.). Now 
I must presuppose the first series in order to be able to view 
n as given. According to reason, with its demand for totality 
of conditions, n is possible only by means of that series. Its A 411 
possibility does not, however, rest upon the subsequent series, 
o&gt; P&gt; &lt;?&gt; r - This latter series may not therefore be regarded as B 438 
given, but only as allowing of being given (dabilis). 

I propose to name the synthesis of a series which begins, on 
the side of the conditions, from the condition which stands near- 
est to the given appearance and so passes to the more remote 
conditions, the regressive synthesis; and that which advances, 
on the side of the conditioned, from the first consequence to 
the more distant, the progressive. The first proceeds in ante- 
cedentia&gt; the second in consequentia. The cosmological ideas 
deal, therefore, with the totality of the regressive synthesis 



388 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

proceeding in antecedentia t not in consequentia. The problem 
of pure reason suggested by the progressive form of totality 
is gratuitous and unnecessary, since the raising of it is not 
required for the complete comprehension of what is given in 
appearance. For that we require to consider only the grounds, 
not the consequences. 

In arranging the table of ideas in accordance with the 
table of categories, we first take the two original quanta of 
all our intuition, time and space. Time is in itself a series, and 
indeed the formal condition of all series. In it, in regard to a 
given present, the antecedents can be a priori distinguished as 
conditions (the past) from the consequents (the future). The 
A 412 transcendental idea of the absolute totality of the series of con- 
B 439 ditions of any given conditioned therefore refers only to all 
past time; and in conformity with the idea of reason past time, 
as condition of the given moment, is necessarily thought as 
being given in its entirety. Now in space, taken in and by itself, 
there is no distinction between progress and regress. For as its 
parts are co-existent, it is an aggregate, not a series. The present 
moment can be regarded only as conditioned by past time, 
never as conditioning it, because this moment comes into exist- 
ence only through past time, or rather through the passing of 
the preceding time. But as the parts of space are co-ordinated 
with, not subordinated to, one another, one part is not the con- 
dition of the possibility of another; and unlike time, space does 
not in itself constitute a series. Nevertheless the synthesis of 
the manifold parts of space, by means of which we apprehend 
space, is successive, taking place in time and containing a 
series. And since in this series of the aggregated spaces (as for 
instance of the feet in a rood) of the given space, those which 
are thought in extension of the given space are always the con- 
dition of the limits of the given space, the measuring of a space 
is also to be regarded as a synthesis of a series of the conditions 
of a given conditioned, only with this difference that the side of 
A 413 the conditions is not in itself distinct from that of the condi- 
B 440 tioned, and that in space regressus and progressus would there- 
fore seem to be one and the same. Inasmuch as one part of 
space is not given through the others but only limited by them., 
we must consider each space, in so far as it is limited, as being 
also conditioned, in that it presupposes another space as the 



ANTINOMY OF PURE REASON 389 

condition of its limits, and so on. In respect of limitation the 
advance in space is thus also a regress, and the transcendental 
idea of the absolute totality of the synthesis in the series of con- 
ditions likewise applies to space. I can as legitimately enquire 
regarding the absolute totality of appearance in space as of 
that in past time. Whether an answer to this question is ever 
possible, is a point which will be decided later. 

Secondly, reality in space, i.e. matter, is a conditioned. Its 
internal conditions are its parts, and the parts of these parts its 
remote conditions. There thus occurs a regressive synthesis, 
the absolute totality of which is demanded by reason. This can 
be obtained only by a completed division in virtue of which the 
reality of matter vanishes either into nothing or into what is 
no longer matter namely, the simple. Here also, then, we have 
a series of conditions, and an advance to the unconditioned. 

Thirdly, as regards the categories of real relation between B 441 
appearances, that of substance with its accidents is not adapted A 414 
to being a transcendental idea. That is to say, in it reason 
finds no ground for proceeding regressively to conditions. Acci- 
d^nts, in so far as they inhere in one and the same substance, 
are co-ordinated with each other, and do not constitute a series. 
Even in their relation to substance they are not really subordi- 
nated to it, but are the mode of existence of the substance 
itself. What in this category may still, however, seem to be an 
idea of transcendental reason, is the concept of the l substantial. 
But since this means no more than the concept of object in 
general, which subsists in so far as we think in it merely the 
transcendental subject apart from all predicates, whereas 
we are here dealing with the unconditioned only as it may 
exist in the series of appearances, it is evident that the sub- 
stantial cannot be a member of that series. This is also true 
of substances in community. They are mere aggregates, and 
contain nothing on which to base a series. 2 For we cannot say 
of them, as we can of spaces, whose limits are never deter- 
mined in and by themselves but only through some other space, 
that they are subordinated to each other as conditions of the 
possibility of one another. There thus remains only the cate- 
gory of causality. It presents a series of causes of a given 

1 [Reading, with Erdmann, vom for von.] 

2 \keinen Exponenten einer Reihe haben.} 



390 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

B 442 effect such that we can proceed to ascend from the latter as the 
conditioned to the former as conditions, and so to answer the 
question of reason. 

A 415 Fourthly, the concepts of the possible, the actual, and the 
necessary do not lead to any series, save in so far as the acci- 
dental in existence must always be regarded as conditioned, 
and as pointing in conformity with the rule of the understand- 
ing to a condition under which it is necessary, and this latter in 
turn to a higher condition, until reason finally attains uncondi- 
tioned necessity in the totality of the series. 

When we thus select out those categories which necessarily 
lead to a series in the synthesis of the manifold, we find that 
there are but four cosmological ideas, corresponding to the 
four titles of the categories: 

B 443 i . Absolute completeness 

of the Composition 
of the given whole of all appearances. 

2. Absolute completeness 

in the Division 
of a given whole in the [field of] appearance. 

3. Absolute completeness 

in the Origination 
of an appearance. 

4. Absolute completeness 

as regards Dependence of Existence 
of the changeable in the [field of] appearance. 

A 416 There are several points which here call for notice. In the 
first place, the idea of absolute totality concerns only the ex- 
position of appearances, and does not therefore refer to the 
pure concept, such as the understanding may form, of a total- 
ity of things in general. Appearances are here regarded as 
given; what reason demands is the absolute completeness of the 
conditions of their possibility, in so far as these conditions con- 
stitute a series. What reason prescribes is therefore an abso- 
lutely (that is to say, in every respect) complete synthesis, 
whereby the appearance may be exhibited 1 in accordance with 
the laws of understanding. 

1 [exponiert.] 



ANTINOMY OF PURE REASON 391 

Secondly, what reason is really seeking in this serial, re- 
gressively continued, synthesis of conditions, is solely the un- B 444 
conditioned. What it aims at is, as it were, such a completeness 
in the series of premisses as will dispense with the need of pre- 
supposing other premisses. This unconditioned is always con- 
tained in the absolute totality of the series as represented in 
imagination. 1 But this absolutely complete synthesis is again 
only an idea; for we cannot know, at least at the start of this 
enquiry, whether such a synthesis is possible in the case of ap- 
pearance. If we represent everything exclusively through pure 
concepts of understanding, and apart from conditions of sen- 
sible intuition, we can indeed at once assert that for a given con- 
ditioned, the whole series of conditions subordinated to each 
other is likewise given. The former is given only through the 
latter. When, however, it is with appearances that we are deal- 
ing, we find a special limitation due to the manner in which 
conditions are given, namely, through the successive synthesis A 417 
of the manifold of intuition a synthesis which has to be 
made complete through the regress. Whether this complete- 
ness is sensibly possible is a further problem; the idea of it 
lies in reason, independently alike of the possibility or of the 
impossibility of our connecting with it any adequate empirical 
concepts. Since, then, the unconditioned is necessarily con- 
tained in the absolute totality of the regressive synthesis of 
the manifold in the [field of] appearance the synthesis being 
executed in accordance with those categories which represent 
appearance as a series of conditions to a given conditioned 
reason here adopts the method of starting from the idea of B 445 
totality, though what it really has in view is the unconditioned \ 
whether of the entire series or of a part of it. Meantime, also, 
it leaves undecided whether and how this totality is attain- 
able. 

This unconditioned may be conceived in either of two 
ways. It may be viewed as consisting of the entire series in 
which all the members without exception are conditioned and 
only the totality of them is absolutely unconditioned. This 
regress is to be entitled infinite. Or alternatively, the absolutely 
unconditioned is only a part of the series-* a part to which the 
other members are subordinated, and which does not itself stand 

1 [Einbildung.] 



392 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

under any other condition. On the first view, the series aparte 

A 418 priori is without limits or beginning, i.e. is infinite, and at the 
same time is given in its entirety. But the regress in it is never 
completed, and can only be called potentially infinite. On the 

B 446 second view, there is a first member of the series which in 
respect of past time is entitled, the beginning of the world, in 
respect of space, the limit of the world \ in respect of the parts 
of a given limited whole, the simple, in respect of causes, 
absolute self-activity (freedom), in respect of the existence of 
alterable things, absolute natural necessity. 

We have two expressions, world and nature, which some- 
times coincide. The former signifies the mathematical sum- 
total of all appearances and the totality of their synthesis, alike 
in the great and in the small, that is, in the advance alike through 
composition and through division. This same world is entitled 

A 419 nature b when it is viewed as a dynamical whole. We are not 
then concerned with the aggregation in space and time, with 

B 447 a view to determining it as a magnitude, but with the unity in 
the existence of appearances. In this case the condition of that 
which happens is entitled the cause. Its unconditioned caus- 
ality in the [field of] appearance is called freedom, and its 
conditioned causality is called natural cause 1 in the narrower 
[adjectival] sense. The conditioned in existence in general is 
termed contingent and the unconditioned necessary. The un- 

tt The absolute totality of the series of conditions to a given con- 
ditioned is always unconditioned, since outside it there are no further 
conditions in respect of which it could be conditioned. But this 
absolute totality of such a series is only an idea, or rather a problem- 
atic concept, the possibility of which has to be investigated, especi- 
ally in regard to the manner in which the unconditioned (the tran- 
scendental idea really at issue) is involved therein. 

B 446 6 Nature, taken adjectivally (formaliter), signifies the connec- 
tion of the determinations of a thing according to an inner principle 
of causality. By nature, on the other hand, taken substantially 
(materialiter), is meant the sum of appearances in so far as they 
stand, in virtue of an inner principle of causality, in thorough- 
going interconnection. In the first sense we speak of the nature of 
fluid matter, of fire, etc. The word is then employed in an adjectival 
manner. When, on the other hand, we speak of the things of nature, 
we have in mind a self-subsisting whole. 

1 \Natur-ur sachel\ 



ANTINOMY OF PURE REASON 393 

conditioned necessity of appearances may be entitled natural 
necessity. 

The ideas with which we are now dealing I have above 
entitled cosmological ideas, partly because by the term 'world' 
we mean the sum of all appearances, and it is exclusively 
to the unconditioned in the appearances that our ideas are 
directed, partly also because the term 'world', in the tran- 
scendental sense, signifies the absolute totality of all existing 
things, and we direct our attention solely to the completeness 
of the synthesis, even though that is only attainable in the A 420 
regress to its conditions. Thus despite the objection that these 
ideas are one and all transcendent, and that although they do 
not in kind surpass the object, namely, appearances, but are 
concerned exclusively with the world of sense, not with nou- 
mena, they yet carry the synthesis to a degree which tran- 
scends all possible experience, I none the less still hold that 
they may quite appropriately be entitled cosmical concepts^ In 
respect of the distinction between the mathematically and the B 448 
dynamically unconditioned at which the regress aims, I might, 
however, call the first two concepts cosmical in the narrower 
sense, as referring to the world of the great and the small, and 
the other two transcendent concepts of nature? This distinction 
has no special immediate value; its significance will appear 
later. 

THE ANTINOMY OF PURE REASON 

Section 2 
ANTITHETIC OF PURE REASON 

If thetic be the name for any body of dogmatic doctrines, 
antithetic may be taken as meaning, not dogmatic assertions of 
the opposite, but the conflict of the doctrines of seemingly dog- 
matic knowledge (thesis cum antithesi) in which no one asser- 
tion can establish superiority over another. The antithetic does A 421 
not, therefore, deal with one-sided assertions. It treats only of 
the conflict of the doctrines of reason with one another and the 
causes of this conflict. The transcendental antithetic is an en- 
quiry into the antinomy of pure reason, its causes and out- 

1 [Weltbegriffe.] [Naturbegriffe.] 



394 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

come. If in employing the principles of understanding we do 

B 449 not merely apply our reason to objects of experience, but 
venture to extend these principles beyond the limits of experi- 
ence, there arise pseudo-rational doctrines which can neither 
hope for confirmation in experience nor fear refutation by it. 
Each of them is not only in itself free from contradiction, but 
finds conditions of its necessity in the very nature of reason 
only that, unfortunately, the assertion of the opposite has, on 
its side, grounds that are just as valid and necessary. 

The questions which naturally arise in connection with 
such a dialectic of pure reason are the following: (i) In what 
propositions is pure reason unavoidably subject to an anti- 
nomy? (2) On what causes does this antinomy depend? (3) 
Whether and in what way, despite this contradiction, does 
there still remain open to reason a path to certainty? 

A dialectical doctrine of pure reason must therefore be 
distinguished from all sophistical propositions in two respects. 

A 422 It must not refer to an arbitrary question such as may be raised 
for some special purpose, but to one which human reason 
must necessarily encounter in its progress. And secondly, both 
it and its opposite must involve no mere artificial illusion such 
as at once vanishes upon detection, but a natural and un- 

6450 avoidable illusion, which even after it has ceased to beguile 
still continues to delude though not to deceive us, and which 
though thus capable of being rendered harmless can never be 
eradicated. 

Such dialectical doctrine relates not to the unity of under- 
standing in empirical concepts, but to the unity of reason in 
mere ideas. Since this unity of reason involves a synthesis ac- 
cording to rules, it must conform to the understanding; and 
yet as demanding absolute unity of synthesis it must at the 
same time harmonise with reason. But the conditions of this 
unity are such that when it is adequate to reason it is too great 
for the understanding; and when suited to the understanding, 
too small for reason. There thus arises a conflict which cannot 
be avoided, do what we will. 

These pseudo-rational assertions thus disclose a dialectical 
battlefield in which the side permitted to open the attack is 

A 423 invariably victorious, and the side constrained to act on the 
defensive is always defeated. Accordingly, vigorous fighters, no 



ANTINOMY OF PURE REASON 395 

matter whether they support a good or a bad cause, if only they 
contrive to secure the right to make the last attack, and are 
not required to withstand a new onslaught from their oppo- 
nents, may always count upon carrying off the laurels. We can 
easily understand that while this arena should time and again 
be contested, and that numerous triumphs should be gained 
by both sides, the last decisive victory always leaves the 8451 
champion of the good cause master of the field, simply be- 
cause his rival is forbidden to resume the combat. As im- 
partial umpires, we must leave aside the question whether it 
is for the good or the bad cause that the contestants are 
fighting. They must be left to decide the issue for themselves. 
After they have rather exhausted than injured one another, 
they will perhaps themselves perceive the futility of their 
quarrel, and part good friends. 

This method of watching, or rather provoking, a conflict 
of assertions, not for the purpose of deciding in favour of one 
or other side, but of investigating whether the object of con- 
troversy is not perhaps a deceptive appearance which each 
vainly strives to grasp, and in regard to which, even if there 
were no opposition to be overcome, neither can arrive at any A 424 
result, this procedure, I say, may be entitled the sceptical 
method. It is altogether different from scepticism a principle 
of technical and scientific ignorance, which undermines the 
foundations of all knowledge, and strives in all possible ways 
to destroy its reliability and steadfastness. For the sceptical 
method aims at certainty. It seeks to discover the point of B 452 
misunderstanding in the case of disputes which are sincerely 
and competently conducted by both sides, just as from the 
embarrassment of judges in cases of litigation wise legislators 
contrive to obtain instruction regarding the defects and am- 
biguities of their laws. The antinomy which discloses itself in 
the application of laws is for our limited wisdom the best 
criterion of the legislation 1 that has given rise to them. Reason, 
which does not in abstract speculation easily become aware 
of its errors, is hereby awakened to consciousness of the 
factors 2 [that have to be reckoned with] in the determination 
of its principles. 

1 \der Nomothetik.} 
8 [Momente.] 



396 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

But it is only for transcendental philosophy that this scep- 
tical method is essential. Though in all other fields of enquiry 
it can, perhaps, be dispensed with, it is not so in this field. 
In mathematics its employment would, indeed, be absurd; for 
in mathematics no false assertions can be concealed and ren- 

A 425 dered invisible, inasmuch as the proofs must always proceed 
under the guidance of pure intuition and by means of a syn- 
thesis that is always evident. In experimental philosophy the 
delay caused by doubt may indeed be useful; no misunder- 
standing is, however, possible which cannot easily be re- 
moved; and the final means of deciding the dispute, whether 
found early or late, must in the end be supplied by experience. 

B 453 Moral philosophy can also present its principles, together 
with their practical consequences, one and all in concrete, in 
what are at least possible experiences; and the misunder- 
standing due to abstraction is thereby avoided. But it is quite 
otherwise with transcendental assertions which lay claim to 
insight into what is beyond the field of all possible experiences. 
Their abstract synthesis can never be given in any a priori 
intuition, and they are so constituted that what is erroneous 
in them can never be detected by means of any experience. 
Transcendental reason consequently admits of no other test 
than the endeavour to harmonise its various assertions. But 
for the successful application of this test the conflict into 
which they fall with one another must first be left to develop 
free and untrammelled. This we shall now set about arranging." 



B 454 } THE ANTINOMY OF PURE REASON { g *&amp; 
FIRST CONFLICT OF THE TRANSCENDENTAL IDEAS 

Thesis Antithesis 

The world has a beginning The world has no begin- 
in time, and is also limited as ning, and no limits in space; 
regards space. it is infinite as regards both 

time and space. 

a The antinomies follow one another in the order of the tran- 
scendental ideas above enumerated [p. 390]. 



FIRST ANTINOMY 



397 



Proof 

If we assume that the world 
has no beginning in time, 
then up to every given mo- 
ment an eternity has elapsed, 
and there has passed away in 
the world an infinite series of 
successive states of things. 
Now the infinity of a series 
consists in the fact that it can 
never be completed through 
successive synthesis. It thus 
follows that it is impossible for 
an infinite world-series to have 
passed away, and that a be- 
ginning of the world is there- 
fore a necessary condition of 
the world's existence. This was 
the first point that called for 
psoof. 

As regards the second point, 
let us again assume the oppo- 
site, namely, that the world is 
an infinite given whole of co- 
existing things. Now the mag- 
nitude of a quantum which is 
not given in intuition a as 
B456/ within certain limits, can be 
thought only through the 
synthesis of its parts, and the 
totality of such a quantum 
only through a synthesis that 
is brought to completion 
through repeated addition of 



Proof 



For let us assume that it 
has a beginning. Since the 
beginning is an existence 
which is preceded by a time 
in which the thing is not, 
there must have been a 
preceding time in which the 
world was not, i.e. an empty 
time. Now no coming to be 
of a thing is possible in an 
empty time, because no part 
of such a time possesses, as 
compared with any other, a 
distinguishing condition of 
existence rather than of non- 
existence; and this applies 
whether the thing is sup- 
posed to arise of itself or 
through some other cause. In 
the world many series of 
things can, indeed, begin; 
but the world itself cannot 
have a beginning, and is 
therefore infinite in respect 
of past time. 

As regards the second 
point, let us start by assum- 
ing the opposite, namely, that 
the world in space is finite 
and limited, and consequently 
exists in an empty space 
which is unlimited. Things 
will therefore not only be 



a An indeterminate quantum can be intuited as a whole when it 
is such that though enclosed within limits we do not require to con- B 456 
struct its totality through measurement, that is, through the success- 
ive synthesis of its parts. For the limits, in cutting off anything 
further, themselves determine its completeness. 



398 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 



related in space but also 
related to space. Now since 
the world is an absolute whole 
beyond which there is no 
object of intuition, and there- 
fore no correlate with which 
the world stands in relation, 
the relation of the world 
to empty space would be a 
relation of it to no object. 
But such a relation, and con- 
sequently the limitation of 
the world by empty space, is 
nothing. The world cannot, 
therefore, be limited in space; 
that is, it is infinite in respect 
of extension.** 



unit to unit. a In order, there- 
fore, to think, as a whole, the 
world which fills all spaces, 
the successive synthesis of 
the parts of an infinite world 
must be viewed as completed, 
that is, an infinite time must 
be viewed as having elapsed 
in the enumeration of all co- 
existing things. This, how- 
ever, is impossible. An in- 
finite aggregate of actual 
things cannot therefore be 
viewed as a given whole, nor 
consequently as simultane- 
ously given. The world is, 
therefore, as regards exten- 
sion in space, not infinite, but 
is enclosed within limits. This 
was the second point in 
dispute. 

a The concept of totality is in this case simply the representa- 
tion of the completed synthesis of its parts; for, since we cannot 
obtain the concept from the intuition of the whole that being in 
this case impossible we can apprehend it only through the syn- 
thesis of the parts viewed as carried, at least in idea, to the comple- 
tion of the infinite. 

B 457 6 Space is merely the form of outer intuition (formal intuition). 
It is not a real object which can be outwardly intuited. Space, as 
prior to all things which determine (occupy or limit) it, or rather 
which give an empirical intuition in accordance with its form, is, 
under the name of absolute space, nothing but the mere possibility 
of outer appearances in so far as they either exist in themselves or 
can be added to given appearances. Empirical intuition is not, there- 
fore, a composite of appearances and space (of perception and empty 
intuition). The one is not the correlate of the other in a synthesis; 
they are connected in one and the same empirical intuition as 
matter and form of the intuition. If we attempt to set one of these 
two factors outside the other, space outside all appearances, there 
arise all sorts of empty determinations of outer intuition, which yet 
are not possible perceptions. For example, a determination of the 
relation of the motion (or rest) of the world to infinite empty space 



FIRST ANTINOMY 



399 



6458} OBSERVATION ON THE FIRST ANTINOMY | 



I. On the Thesis 

In stating these conflicting 
arguments I have not sought 
to elaborate sophisms. That 
is to say, I have not resorted 
to the method of the special 
pleader who attempts to take 
advantage of an opponent's 
carelessness freely allowing 
the appeal to a misunderstood 
law, in order that he may be 
in a position to establish his 
own unrighteous claims by 
the refutation of that law. 
Each of the above proofs 
arises naturally out of the 
matter in dispute, and no ad- 
vantage has been taken of 
the openings afforded by er- 
roneous conclusions arrived 
at by dogmatists in either 
party. 

I might have made a 
pretence of establishing the 
thesis in the usual manner of 
the dogmatists, by starting 
from a defective concept of 
the infinitude of a given mag- 
nitude. I might have argued 
that a magnitude is infinite 
if a greater than itself, as 
determined by the multipli- 
city of given units which it 



II. On the Antithesis 

The proof of the infinitude 
of the given world-series and 
of the world-whole, rests upon 
the fact that, on the contrary 
assumption, an empty time 
and an empty space, must 
constitute the limit of the 
world. I am aware that 
attempts have been made to 
evade this conclusion by argu- 
ing that a limit of the world 
in time and space is quite 
possible without our having 
to make the impossible as- 
sumption of an absolute 
time prior to the beginning 
of the world, or of an absolute 
space extending beyond the 
real world. With the latter 
part of this doctrine, as held 
by the philosophers of the 
Leibnizian school, I am en- 
tirely satisfied. Space is merely 
the form of outer intuition; 
it is not a real object which 
can be outwardly intuited; it 
is not a correlate of the ap- 
pearances, but the form of 
the appearances themselves. 
And since space is thus no 
object but only the form of 
possible objects, it cannot be 



is a determination which can never be perceived, and is therefore 
the predicate of a mere thought-entity. 



400 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 



contains, is not possible. Now 
no multiplicity is the great- 
est, since one or more units 
can always be added to it. 
Consequently an infinite given 
magnitude, and therefore an 
infinite world (infinite as re- 
gards the elapsed series or as 
regards extension) is impos- 
sible; it must be limited in 
both respects. Such is the 
line that my proof might have 
followed. But the above con- 
cept is not adequate to what 
we mean by an infinite whole, 
It does not represent how 
great it is, and consequently . 
is not the concept of a maxi- 
B 460} mum - Through it we think 
only its relation to any assign- 
able unit in respect to which 
it is greater than all num- 
ber. According as the unit 
chosen is greater or smaller, 
the infinite would be greater 
or smaller. Infinitude, how- 
ever, as it consists solely 
in the relation to the given 
unit, would always remain 
the same. The absolute mag- 
nitude of the whole would 
not, therefore, be known in 
this way; indeed, the above 



regarded as something abso- 
lute in itself that determines 
the existence of things. Things, 
as appearances, determine 
space, that is, of all its pos- 
sible predicates of magnitude 
and relation they determine 
this or that particular one to 
belong to the real. Space, on 
the other hand, viewed as a 
self-subsistent something, is 
nothing real in itself; and can- 
not, therefore, determine the 
magnitude or shape of real 
things. Space, it further fol- 
lows, whether full or empty, 
may be limited by appear- 
ances, but appearances can- |g *3* 
not be limited by an empty 
space outside them. This is 
likewise true of time. But 
while all this may be granted, 
it yet cannot be denied that 
these two non-entities, 1 empty 
space outside the world and 
empty time prior to it, have 
to be assumed if we are to 
assume a limit to the world 
in space and in time. 

The method of argument 
which professes to enable us 
to avoid the above conse- 
quence (that of having to 



a It will be evident that what we here desire to say is that empty 
B 461 space, so far as it is limited by appearances, that is, empty space 
within the world, is at least not contradictory of transcendental 
principles and may therefore, so far as they are concerned, be 
admitted. This does not, however, amount to an assertion of its 
possibility. 

1 [Undinge,] 



FIRST ANTINOMY 



401 



concept does not really deal 
with it. 

The true transcendental 
concept of infinitude is this, 
that the successive synthesis 
of units required for the enu- 
meration of a quantum can 
never be completed." Hence 
it follows with complete cer- 
tainty that an eternity of 
actual successive states lead- 
ing up to a given (the pre- 
sent) moment cannot have 
elapsed, and that the world 
must therefore have a begin- 
ning. 

In the second part of the 
thesis the difficulty involved 
in a series that is infinite and 
yet has elapsed does not arise, 
since the manifold of a world 
which is infinite in respect of 
extension is given as co-exist- 
ing. But if we are to think the 
totality of such a multiplicity, 
and yet cannot appeal to 
limits that of themselves con- 
stitute it a totality in intuition, 
we have to account for a con- 
cept which in this case cannot 
proceed from the whole to 
the determinate multiplicity 
of the parts, but which must 
demonstrate the possibility of 
a whole by means of the 
successive synthesis of the 
parts. Now since this syn- 



assume that if the world has 
limits in time and space, the 
infinite void must determine 
the magnitude in which actual 
things are to exist) consists 
in surreptitiously substituting 
for the sensible world some 
intelligible world of which 
we know nothing; for the 
first beginning (an exist- 
ence preceded by a time of 
non-existence) an existence 
in general which presupposes 
no other condition whatso- 
ever; and for the limits of 
extension boundaries of the 
world - whole thus getting 
rid of time and space. But we 
are here treating only of the 
mundus phaenomenon and 
its magnitude, and cannot 
therefore abstract from the 
aforesaid conditions of sensi- 
bility without destroying the 
very being of that world. If 
the sensible world is limited, 
it must necessarily lie in the 
infinite void. If that void, and 
consequently space in general 
as a priori condition of the 
possibility of appearances, be 
set aside, the entire sensible 
world vanishes. This world 
is all that is given us in 
our problem. The mundus 
intelligibilis is nothing but 
the general concept of a 



This quantum therefore contains a quantity (of given units) 
which is greater than any number which is the mathematical con- 
cept of the infinite, 

2D 



402 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 



thesis must constitute a never 
to be completed series, I can- 
not think a totality either 
prior to the synthesis or by 
means of the synthesis. For 
the concept of totality is in 
this case itself the representa- 
tion of a completed synthesis 
of the parts. And since this 
completion is impossible, so 
likewise is the concept of it. 



world in general, in which 
abstraction is made from all 
conditions of its intuition, 
and in reference to which, 
therefore, no synthetic pro- 
position, either affirmative 
or negative, can possibly be 
asserted. 



A 434 
B 462 



THE ANTINOMY OF PURE REASON 

SECOND CONFLICT OF THE TRANSCENDENTAL IDEAS 



435 
463 



Thesis 

Every composite substance 
in the world is made up of 
simple parts, and nothing any- 
where exists save the simple 
or what is composed of the 
simple. 

Proof 

Let us assume that com- 
posite substances are not 
made up of simple parts. If 
all composition be then re- 
moved in thought, no con- 
posite part, and (since we 
admit no simple parts) also 
no simple part, that is to say, 
nothing at all, will remain, 
and accordingly no substance 
will be given. Either, there- 
fore, it is impossible to remove 
in thought all composition, 
or after its removal there 
must remain something which 



Antithesis 

No composite thing in the 
world is made up of simple 
parts, and there nowhere 
exists in the world anything 
simple. 

Proof 

Assume that a composite 
thing (as substance) is made 
up of simple parts. Since all 
external relation, and there- 
fore all composition of sub- 
stances, is possible only in 
space, a space must be made 
up of as many parts as are 
contained in the composite 
which occupies it. Space, 
however, is not made up of 
simple parts, but of spaces. 
Every part of the composite 
must therefore occupy a space. 
But the absolutely first parts 



SECOND ANTINOMY 



403 



exists without composition, of every composite are simple. 



that is, the simple. In the for- 
mer case the composite would 
not be made up of substances; 
composition, as applied to 
substances, is only an acci- 
dental relation in independ- 
ence of which they must 
still persist as self-subsistent 
B 464} Beings. Since this contradicts 
our supposition, there remains 
only the original supposition, 
that a composite of sub- 
stances in the world is made 
up of simple parts. 

It follows, as an immediate 
consequence, that the things 
in the world are all, without 
exception, simple beings; that 
composition is merely an 
external state of these beings; 
and that although we can 
never so isolate these ele- 
mentary substances as to 
take them out of this state 
of composition, reason must 
think them as the primary 
subjects of all composition, 
and therefore, as simple be- 
ings, prior to all composition. 



The simple therefore occupies 
a space. Now since every- 
thing real, which occupies a 
space, contains in itself a 
manifold of constituents ex- 
ternal to one another, and is 
therefore composite; and since 
a real composite is not made 
up of accidents (for accidents 
could not exist outside one 
another, in the absence of 
substance) but of substances, 
it follows that the simple 
would be a composite of 
substances which is self- 
contradictory. 

The second proposition of 
the antithesis, that nowhere 
in the world does there exist 
anything simple, is intended (3465 
to mean only this, that the 
existence of the absolutely 
simple cannot be established 
by any experience or percep- 
tion, either outer or inner; 
and that the absolutely simple 
is therefore a mere idea, the 
objective reality of which can 
never be shown in any pos- 
sible experience, and which, 
as being without an object, 
has no application in the 
explanation 1 of the appear- 
ances. For if we assumed 
that in experience an object 
might be found for this tran- 
scendental idea, the empiri- 
cal intuition of such an object 



[Exposition.} 



404 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

would have to be known as 
one that contains no manifold 
[factors] external to one an- 
other and combined into 
unity. But since from the 
non-consciousness of such a 
manifold we cannot conclude 
to its complete impossibility 
in every kind of intuition of 
an object; and since without 
such proof absolute simplicity 
can never be established, it 
follows that such simplicity 
cannot be inferred from any 
perception whatsoever. An 
absolutely simple object can 
never be given in any pos- 
sible experience. And since 
by the world of sense we 
must mean the sum of all 
possible experiences, it follows 
that nothing simple is to be 
found anywhere in it. 

This second proposition of 
the antithesis has a much 
wider application than the 
first. Whereas the first pro- 
position banishes the simple 
only from the intuition of the 
composite, the second ex- 
cludes it from the whole of 
nature. Accordingly it has 
not been possible to prove 
this second proposition by 
reference to the concept of 
a given object of outer in- 
tuition (of the composite), but 
only by reference to its rela- 
tion to a possible experience 
in general. 



SECOND ANTINOMY 



405 



OBSERVATION ON THE SECOND ANTINOMY 



I. On the Thesis 

When I speak of a whole 
as necessarily made up of 
simple parts, I am referring 
only to a substantial whole 
that is composite in the strict 
sense of the term 'composite', 
that is, to that accidental 
unity of the manifold which, 
given as separate (at least in 
thought), is brought into a 
mutual connection, and there- 
by constitutes a unity. Space 
should properly be called not 
compositum but totum, since 
its parts are possible only in 
the whole, not the whole 
through the parts. It might, 
indeed, be called a compost- 
turn ideale^ but not reale. 
This, however, is a mere 
subtlety. Since space is not 
a composite made up of 
substances (nor even of 
real accidents), if I remove 
all compositeness from it, 
nothing remains, not even the 
point. For a point is possible 
only as the limit of a space, 
and so of a composite. Space 
and time do not, therefore, 
consist of simple parts. What 
belongs only to the state of a 
substance, even though it has 
a magnitude, e.g. alteration, 
does not consist of the simple; 



II. On the Antithesis 

Against the doctrine of the 
infinite divisibility of matter, 
the proof of which is purely 
mathematical, objections have 
been raised by the monadists. 
These objections, however, at 
once lay the monadists open to 
suspicion. For however evi- 
dent mathematical proofs 
may be, they decline to recog- 
nise that the proofs are based 
upon insight into the constitu- 
tion of space, in so far as space 
is in actual fact the formal 
condition of the possibility of 
all matter. They regard them 
merely as inferences from ab- 
stract but arbitrary concepts, 
and so as not being applicable 
to real things. How can it be 
possible to invent a different 
kind of intuition from that 
given in the original intuition 
of space, and how can the a 
^^/determinations of space 
fail to be directly applicable 
to what is only possible in so 
far as it fills this space! Were 
we to give heed to them, 
then beside the mathematical 
point, which, while simple, 
is not a part but only the 
limit of a space, we should 
have to conceive physical 
points as being likewise 



406 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 



that is to say, a certain degree 
of alteration does not come 
about through the accretion 
of many simple alterations. 
Our inference from the com- 
posite to the simple applies 
only to self-subsisting things. 
Accidents of the state [of a 
thing] are not self-subsisting. 
Thus the proof of the neces- 
sity of the simple, as the con- 
stitutive parts of the sub- 
stantially composite, can easily 
be upset (and therewith the 
thesis as a whole), if it be 
extended too far and in the 
absence of a limiting qualifi- 
cation be made to apply to 
everything composite as has 
frequently happened. 

Moreover I am here speak- 
ing only of the simple in so 
far as it is necessarily given 
in the composite the latter 
being resolvable into the 
simple, as its constituent 

A 442) parts. The word monas, in the 
B 47oJ r . - ' 

strict sense in which it is em- 
ployed by Leibniz, should refer 
only to the simple which is 
immediately given as simple 
substance (e.g. in self-con- 
sciousness), and not to an 
element of the composite. 
This latter is better entitled 
atomus. 1 As I am seeking 
to prove the [existence of] 
simple substances only as 
elements in the composite, I 

1 [den Atomus. This use of the term 



simple, and yet as having the 
distinguishing characteristic 
of being able, as parts of 
space, to fill space through 
their mere aggregation. With- 
out repeating the many fa- 
miliar and conclusive refuta- 
tions of this absurdity it 
being quite futile to attempt 
to reason away by sophistical 
manipulation of purely dis- 
cursive concepts the evident 
demonstrated truth of mathe- 
matics- I make only one ob- 
servation, that when philo- 
sophy here plays tricks with {3 wjg 
mathematics, it does so be- 
cause it forgets that in this 
discussion we are concerned 
only with appearances and 
their condition. Here it is 
not sufficient to find for the 
pure concept of the com- 
posite formed by the under- 
standing the concept of the 
simple; what has to be found 
is an intuition of the simple 
for the intuition of the com- 
posite (matter). But by the 
laws of sensibility, and there- 
fore in objects of the senses, 
this is quite impossible. 
Though it may be true that 
when a whole, made up of 
substances, is thought by the 
pure understanding alone, we 
must, prior to all composi- 
tion of it, have the simple, 
this does not hold of the 

as a masculine is peculiar to Kant.] 



SECOND ANTINOMY 



407 



might entitle the thesis 1 of 
the second antinomy, tran- 
scendental atomistic. But as 
this word has long been ap- 
propriated to signify a parti- 
cular mode of explaining 
bodily appearances (mole- 
culae), and therefore pre- 
supposes empirical concepts, 
the thesis may more suitably 
be entitled the dialectical 
principle of monadology. 



[Reading, with Mellin and 



totum substantiate phaeno- 
menon which, as empirical 
intuition in space, carries 
with it the necessary char- 
acteristic that no part of it 
is simple, because no part of 
space is simple. The monad- 
ists have, indeed, been suffi- 
ciently acute to seek escape 
from this difficulty by refusing 
to treat space as a condition 
of the possibility of the objects 
of outer intuition (bodies), 
and by taking instead these 
and the dynamical relation of 
substances as the condition of 
the possibility of space. But 
we have a concept of bodies 
only as appearances; and as 
such they necessarily pre- 
suppose space as the condi- 
tion of the possibility of all 
outer appearance. This eva- 
sion of the issue is therefore 
futile, and has already been 
sufficiently disposed of in 
the Transcendental Aesthetic. 
The argument of the monad- 
ists would indeed be valid if 
bodies were things in them- 
selves. 

The second dialectical as- 
sertion has this peculiarity, 
that over against it stands 
a dogmatic assertion which 
is the only one of all the 
pseudo-rational assertions that 
undertakes to afford mani- 
fest evidence, in an empirical 

Valentiner, These for Antithese.} 



408 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

object, of the reality of that 
which we have been ascrib- 
ing only to transcendental 
ideas, namely, the absolute 
simplicity of substance I 
refer to the assertion that 
the object of inner sense, 
the ' I ' which there thinks, 
is an absolutely simple sub- 
stance. Without entering upon 
this question (it has been 
fully considered above), I 
need only remark, that if (as 
happens in the quite bare 
representation, * I ') anything 
is thought as object only, 
without the addition of any 
synthetic determination of its 
intuition, nothing manifold 
and no compositeness can be 
perceived in such a representa- 
tion. Besides, since the predi- 
cates through which I think 
this object are merely intui- 
tions of inner sense, nothing 
can there be found which 
shows a manifold [of ele- 
ments] external to one an- 
other, and therefore real com- 
positeness. Self-consciousness 
is of such a nature that since 
the subject which thinks is 
at the same time its own 
object, it cannot divide itself, 
though it can divide the de- 
terminations which inhere in 
it ; for in regard to itself 
every object is absolute unity. 
Nevertheless, when this sub- 
ject is viewed outwardly^ as 



THIRD ANTINOMY 



409 



an object of intuition, it must 
exhibit [some sort of] com- 
positeness in its appearance; 
and it must always be viewed 
in this way if we wish to 
know whether or not there 
be in it a manifold [of ele- 
ments] external to one an- 
other. 



A 444 
B 472 



THE ANTINOMY OF PURE REASON 

THIRD CONFLICT OF THE TRANSCENDENTAL IDEAS 



A 445 
B 473 



Thesis 

Causality in accordance 
with laws of nature is not the 
only causality from which the 
appearances of the world can 
one and all be derived. To 
explain these appearances it 
is necessary to assume that 
there is also another causality, 
that of freedom. 

Proof 

Let us assume that there 
is no other causality than that 
in accordance with laws of 
nature. This being so, every- 
thing which takes place pre- 
supposes a preceding state 
upon which it inevitably fol- 
lows according to a rule. But 
the preceding state must it- 
self be something which has 
taken place (having come to 
be in a time in which it 
previously was not); for if it 



Antithesis 

There is no freedom; every- 
thing in the world takes place 
solely in accordance with 
laws of nature. 



Proof 

Assume that there is free- 
dom in the transcendental 
sense, as a special kind of 
causality in accordance with 
which the events in the 
world can have come about, 
namely, a power of absolutely 
beginning a state, and there- 
fore also of absolutely begin- 
ning a series of consequences 
of that state; it then follows 
that not only will a series 
have its absolute beginning 



410 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 



had always existed, its con- 
sequence also would have 
always existed, and would 
not have only just arisen. 
The causality of the cause 
through which something 
takes place is itself, therefore, 
something that has taken 
place^ which again presup- 
poses, in accordance with 
the law of nature, a pre- 
ceding state and its causality, 
and this in similar manner a 
still earlier state, and so on. 
If, therefore, everything takes 
place solely in accordance 
with laws of nature, there 
will always be only a relative 1 
B 474} an ^ never a first beginning, 
and consequently no com- 
pleteness of the series on the 
side of the causes that arise 
the one from the other. But 
the law of nature is just this, 
that nothing takes place with- 
out a cause sufficiently deter- 
mined a priori. The proposi- 
tion that no causality is pos- 
sible save in accordance with 
laws of nature, when taken 
in unlimited universality, is 
therefore self -contradictory; 
and this cannot, therefore, 
be regarded as the sole kind 
of causality. 

We must, then, assume a 
causality through which some- 
thing takes place, the cause 
of which is not itself deter- 



in this spontaneity, but that 
the very determination of 
this spontaneity to originate 
the series, that is to say, 
the causality itself, will have 
an absolute beginning; there 
will be no antecedent through 
which this act, in taking 
place, is determined in ac- 
cordance with fixed laws. 
But every beginning of action 
presupposes a state of the 
not yet acting cause; and a 
dynamical beginning of the 
action, if it is also a first be- 
ginning, presupposes a state 
which has no causal con- 
nection with the preceding 
state of the cause, that is to 
say, in nowise follows from 
it. Transcendental freedom 
thus stands opposed to the 
law of causality; and the kind 
of connection which it as- 
sumes as holding between the |g 47 
successive states of the active 
causes renders all unity of 
experience impossible. It is 
not to be met with in any 
experience, and is therefore 
an empty thought-entity. 

In nature alone, therefore, 
[not in freedom], must we 
seek for the connection and 
order of cosmical events. 
Freedom (independence) from 
the laws of nature is no doubt 
a liberation from compulsion, 
but also from the guidance 



[subalternen.] 



THIRD ANTINOMY 



411 



mined, in accordance with 
necessary laws, by another 
cause antecedent to it, that is 
to say, an absolute spontaneity 
of the cause, whereby a series 
of appearances, which pro- 
ceeds in accordance with laws 
of nature, begins of itself. 
This is transcendental free- 
dom, without which, even in 
the [ordinary] course of na- 
ture, the series of appearances 
on the side of the causes can 
never be complete. 



of all rules. For it is not 
permissible to say that the 
laws of freedom enter into 
the causality exhibited in the 
course of nature, and so take 
the place of natural laws. 
If freedom were determined 
in accordance with laws, 
it would not be freedom; 
it would simply be nature 
under another name. Nature 
and transcendental freedom 
differ as do conformity to 
law and lawlessness. Nature 
does indeed impose upon the 
understanding the exacting 
task of always seeking the 
origin of events ever higher 
in the series of causes, their 
causality being always condi- 
tioned. But in compensation 
it holds out the promise of 
thoroughgoing unity of ex- 
perience in accordance with 
laws. The illusion of freedom, 
on the other hand, offers a 
point of rest to the enquiring 
understanding in the chain 
of causes, conducting it to 
an unconditioned causality 
which begins to act of itself. 
This causality is, however, 
blind, and abrogates those 
rules through which alone 
a completely coherent ex- 
perience is possible. 



412 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 



A 44 8 
B476 



\ OBSERVATION 
I. On the Thesis 



THE THIRD ANTINOMY 

II. On the Antithesis 



( A 449 
\ B 4 77 



The transcendental idea of 
freedom does not by any 
means constitute the whole 
content of the psychological 
concept of that name, which 
is mainly empirical. The tran- 
scendental idea stands only 
for the absolute spontaneity 
of an action, as the proper 
ground of its imputability. 
This, however, is, for philo- 
sophy, the real stumbling- 
block; for there are insur- 
mountable difficulties in the 
way of admitting any such 
type of unconditioned caus- 
ality. What has always so 
greatly embarrassed specula- 
tive reason in dealing with 
the question of the freedom 
of the will, is its strictly 
transcendental aspect. The 
problem, properly viewed, is 
solely this: whether we must 
admit a power of spontane- 
ously beginning a series of 
successive things or states. 
How such a power is possible 
is not a question which re- 
quires to be answered in this 
case, any more than in regard 
to causality in accordance 
with the laws of nature. For, 
[as we have found], we have 
to remain satisfied with the 



The defender of an om- 
nipotent nature (transcend- 
ental physiocracy), in main- 
taining his position against 
the pseudo-rational argu- 
ments offered in support of the 
counter-doctrine of freedom, 
would argue as follows. If 
you do not, as regards time y 
admit anything as being 
mathematically first in the 
world, there is no necessity ', 
as regards causality, for seek- 
ing so mething that is dynamic- 
ally first. What authority 
have you for inventing an 
absolutely first state of the 
world, and therefore an abso- 
lute beginning of the ever- 
flowing series of appearances, 
and so of procuring a resting- 
place for your imagination 
by setting bounds to limitless 
nature? Since the substances 
in the world have always 
existed at least the unity of 
experience renders necessary 
such a supposition there is 
no difficulty in assuming that 
change of their states, that is, 
a series of their alterations, has 
likewise always existed, and 
therefore that a first begin- 
ning, whether mathematical 
or dynamical, is not to be 



THIRD ANTINOMY 



a priori knowledge that this 
latter type of causality must be 
presupposed; we are not in the 
least able to comprehend how 
it can be possible that through 
one existence the existence 
of another is determined, and 
for this reason must be guided 
by experience alone. The 
necessity of a first beginning, 
due to freedom, of a series of 
appearances we have demon- 
strated only in so far as it 
is required to make an origin 
of the world conceivable; for 
all the later following states 
B 478] can ^ e taken as resulting ac- 
cording to purely natural 
laws. But since the power 
of spontaneously beginning 
a * series in time is thereby 
proved (though not under- 
stood), it is now also per- 
missible for us to admit 
within the course of the 
world different series as cap- 
able in their causality of 
beginning of themselves, and 
so to attribute to their sub- 
stances a power of acting 
from freedom. And we must 
not allow ourselves to be 
prevented from drawing this 
conclusion by a misapprehen- 
sion, namely that, as a series 
occurring in the world can 
have only a relatively first 
beginning, being always pre- 
ceded in the world by some 
other state of things, no 



looked for. The possibility of 
such an infinite derivation, 
without a first member to 
which all the rest is merely a 
sequel, cannot indeed, in re- 
spect of its possibility, be ren- 
dered comprehensible. But 
if for this reason you refuse 
to recognise this enigma in 
nature, you will find yourself 
compelled to reject many 
fundamental synthetic pro- 
perties and forces, which as 
little admit of comprehension. 
The possibility even of altera- | 
tion itself would have to be 
denied. For were you not 
assured by experience that 
alteration actually occurs, 
you would never be able to 
excogitate a priori the pos- 
sibility of such a ceaseless 
sequence of being and not- 
being. 

Even if a transcendental 
power of freedom be allowed, 
as supplying a beginning of 
happenings in the world, this 
power would in any case have 
to be outside the world 
(though any such assump- 
tion that over and above the 
sum of all possible intuitions 
there exists an object which 
cannot be given in any pos- 
sible perception, is still a very 
bold one). But to ascribe to 
substances in the world itself 
such a power, can never be 
permissible; for, should this 



414 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 



absolute first beginning of a 
series is possible during the 
course of the world. For the 
absolutely first beginning of 
which we are here speaking 
is not a beginning in time, 
but in causality. If, for in- 
stance, I at this moment 
arise from my chair, in com- 
plete freedom, without being 
necessarily determined thereto 
by the influence of natural 
causes, a new series, with all 
its natural consequences in 
infinitum, has its absolute 
beginning in this event, al- 
though as regards time this 
event is only the continuation 
of a preceding series. For this 
resolution and act of mine do 
not form part of the succession 
of purely natural effects, and 
are not a mere continuation 
of them. In respect of its 
happening, natural causes 
exercise over it no determin- 
ing influence whatsoever. It 
does indeed follow upon them, 
but without arising out of 
them; and accordingly, in 
respect of causality though 
not of time, must be entitled 
an absolutely first beginning 
of a series of appearances. 

This requirement of reason, 
that we appeal in the series 
of natural causes to a first 
beginning, due to freedom, 
is amply confirmed when 
we observe that all the philo- 



be done, that connection of 
appearances determining one 
another with necessity ac- 
cording to universal laws, 
which we entitle nature, and 
with it the criterion of em- 
pirical truth, whereby experi- 
ence is distinguished from 
dreaming, would almost en- 
tirely disappear. Side by side 
with such a lawless faculty 
of freedom, nature [as an 
ordered system] is hardly 
thinkable; the influences of 
the former would so un- 
ceasingly alter the laws of 
the latter that the appear- 
ances which in their natural 
course are regular and uni- 
form would be reduced to 
disorder and incoherence. 



FOURTH ANTINOMY 



415 



sophers of antiquity, with the 
sole exception of the Epi- 
curean School, felt them- 
selves obliged, when explain- 
ing cosmical movements, to 
assume a prime mover &gt; that 
is, a freely acting cause, which 
first and of itself began this 
series of states. They made 
no attempt to render a first be- 
ginning conceivable through 
nature's own resources. 



A 452 ) 
B 480 / 



THE ANTINOMY OF PURE REASON 



/ A 453 
\ B 4 8i 



FOURTH CONFLICT OF THE TRANSCENDENTAL IDEAS 



Thesis 

There belongs to the world, 
either as its part or as its 
cause, a being that is abso- 
lutely necessary. 

Proof 

The sensible world, as the 
sum-total of all appearances, 
contains a series of alterations. 
For without such a series even 
the representation of serial 
time, as a condition of the 
possibility of the sensible 
world, would not be given us. a 
But every alteration stands 
under its condition, which pre- 
cedes it in time and renders 



A ntithesis 

An absolutely necessary 
being nowhere exists in the 
world, nor does it exist out- 
side the world as its cause. 

Proof 

If we assume that the 
world itself is necessary, or 
that a necessary being exists 
in it, there are then two alter- 
natives. Either there is a be- 
ginning in the series of alter- 
ations which is absolutely 
necessary, and therefore with- 
out a cause, or the series it- 
self is without any beginning, 
and although contingent and 



Time, as the formal condition of the possibility of changes, is 
indeed objectively prior to them; subjectively, however, in actual 
consciousness, the representation of time, like every other, is given 
only in connection with perceptions. 



416 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 



it necessary. Now every con- 
ditioned that is given pre- 
supposes, in respect of its 
existence, a complete series of 
conditions up to the uncon- 
ditioned, which alone is abso- 
lutely necessary. Alteration 
thus existing as a consequence 
of the absolutely necessary, 
the existence of something 
absolutely necessary must 
be granted. But this neces- 
sary existence itself belongs 
to the sensible world. For if 
it existed outside that world, 
the series of alterations in the 
world would derive its begin- 
ning from a necessary cause 
B 4^2} wmcn would not itself belong 
to the sensible world. This, 
however, is impossible. For 
since the beginning of a series 
in time can be determined 
only by that which precedes 
it in time, the highest condi- 
tion of the beginning of a 
series of changes must exist 
in the time when the series 
as yet was not (for a begin- 
ning is an existence preceded 
by a time in which the thing 
that begins did not yet exist). 
Accordingly the causality 
of the necessary cause of 



conditioned in all its parts, 
none the less, as a whole, is 
absolutely necessary and un- 
conditioned. The former 
alternative, however, conflicts 
with the dynamical law of the 
determination of all appear- 
ances in time; and the latter 
alternative contradicts itself, 
since the existence of a series 1 
cannot be necessary if no 
single member 2 of it is neces- 
sary. 

If, on the other hand, we 
assume that an absolutely 
necessary cause of the world 
exists outside the world, then 
this cause, as the highest 
member in the series of the 
causes of changes in the 
world, must begin the exist- 
ence of the latter and their 
series." Now this cause must 
itself begin to act, and its 
causality would therefore be 
in time, and so would be- 
long to the sum of appear- 
ances, that is, to the world. It 
follows that it itself, the cause, 
would not be outside the 
world which contradicts our 
hypothesis. Therefore neither 
in the world, nor outside the 
world (though in causal con- 



a The word 'begin' is taken in two senses; first as active, signify- 
ing that as cause it begins (tnfii) a series of states which is its effect; 
secondly as pass we, signifying the causality which begins to operate 
(fit) in the cause itself. I reason here from the former to the latter 
meaning. 

1 [Menge.] [7W/.] 



FOURTH ANTINOMY 



417 



alterations, and therefore the 
cause itself, must belong" to 
time and so to appearance 
time being possible only as 
the form of appearance. Such 
causality cannot, therefore, 
be thought apart from that 
sum of all appearances which 
constitutes the world of sense. 
Something absolutely neces- 
sary is therefore contained in 
the world itself, whether this 
something be the whole series 
of alterations in the world or 
a part of the series. 



nection with it), does there 
exist any absolutely necessary 
being. 



B 4 



- OBSERVATION ON THE FOURTH ANTINOMY 
I. On the Thesis II. On the Antithesis 



/A 457 
\B 4 8S 



In proving the existence of 
a necessary being I ought 
not, in this connection, to 
employ any but the cosmo- 
logical argument, that, 
namely, which ascends from 
the conditioned in the [field 
of] appearance to the un- 
conditioned in concept, this 
latter being regarded as the 
necessary condition of the 
absolute totality of the series. 
To seek proof of this from the 
mere idea of a supreme being 
belongs to another principle 
of reason, and will have to 
be treated separately. 

The pure cosmological 
proof, in demonstrating the 
existence of a necessary being, 



The difficulties in the way 
of asserting the existence of 
an absolutely necessary high- 
est cause, which we suppose 
ourselves to meet as we 
ascend in the series of appear- 
ances, cannot be such as 
arise in connection with mere 
concepts of the necessary 
existence of a thing in general. 
The difficulties are not, there- 
fore, ontological, but must 
concern the causal connection 
of a series of appearances for 
which a condition has to be 
assumed that is itself un- 
conditioned, and so must be 
cosmological, and relate to 
empirical laws. It must be 
shown that regress in the 
2 E 



418 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 



has to leave unsettled whether 
this being is the world itself 
or a thing 1 distinct from it. 
To establish the latter view, 
we should require principles 
which are no longer cosmo- 
logical and do not continue in 
the series of appearances. For 
we should have to employ 
concepts of contingent beings 
in general (viewed as objects 
of the understanding alone) 
and a principle which will 
enable us to connect these, 
by means of mere concepts, 
with a necessary being. But 
all this belongs to a tran- 
scendent philosophy ; and 
that we are not yet in a 
position to discuss. 

If we begin our proof 
cosmologically , resting it upon 
the series of appearances and 
the regress therein according 
to empirical laws of causality, 
we must not afterwards sud- 
denly deviate from this mode 
of argument, passing over to 
something that is not a mem- 
IS 485} k er f tne series. Anything 
taken as condition must be 
viewed precisely in the same 
manner in which we viewed 
the relation of the condi- 
tioned to its condition in the 
series which is supposed to 
carry us by continuous ad- 
vance to the supreme condi- 
tion. If, then, this relation is 



series of causes (in the 
sensible world) can never 
terminate in an empirically 
unconditioned condition, and 
that the cosmological argu- 
ment from the contingency 
of states of the world, as 
evidenced by their alterations, 
does not support the assump- 
tion of a first and absolutely 
originative cause of the series. 

A strange situation is dis- | B J| 
closed in this antinomy. 
From the same ground on 
which, in the thesis, the ex- 
istence of an original being 
was inferred, its non-exist- 
ence is inferred in the anti- 
thesis, and this with equal 
stringency. We were first 
assured that a necessary being 
exists because the whole of 
past time comprehends the 
series of all conditions and 
therefore also the uncondi- 
tioned (that is, the necessary); 
we are now assured that there 
is no necessary being } and 
precisely for the reason that 
the whole of past time com- 
prehends the series of all 
conditions (which therefore 
are one and all themselves 
conditioned). The explana- 
tion is this. The former argu- 
ment takes account only of 
the absolute totality of the 
series of conditions deter- 
mining each other in time, 
Ding] 



FOURTH ANTINOMY 



419 



sensible and falls within the 
province of the possible em- 
pirical employment of under- 
standing, the highest condi- 
tion or cause can bring the 
regress to a close only in 
accordance with the laws of 
sensibility, and therefore only 
in so far as it itself belongs 
to the temporal series. The 
necessary being must there- 
fore be regarded as the highest 
member of the cosmical series. 
Nevertheless certain think- 
ers have allowed themselves 
the liberty of making such a 
saltus (jierdfBa(n,&lt;s els a\\o 
761/09). From the alterations 
in the world they have in- 
ferred their empirical con- 
tingency, that is, their de- 
pendence on empirically de- 
termining causes, and so have 
obtained an ascending series 
of empirical conditions. And 
so far they were entirely in 
the right. But since they 
could not find in such a 
series any first beginning, or 
any highest member, they 
passed suddenly from the 
empirical concept of con- 
tingency, and laid hold upon 
the pure category, which then 
gave rise to a strictly intelli- 
gible series the completeness 
of which rested on the exist- 
ence of an absolutely neces- 
sary cause. Since this cause 



and so reaches what is un- 
conditioned and necessary. 
The latter argument, on the 
other hand, takes into con- 
sideration the contingency of 
everything which is deter- 
mined in the temporal series 
(everything being preceded 
by a time in which the condi- 
tion must itself again be 
determined as conditioned), 
and from this point of view 
everything unconditioned and | B ^ 
all absolute necessity com- 
pletely vanish. Nevertheless, 
the method of argument in 
both cases is entirely in con- 
formity even with ordinary 
human reason, which fre- 
quently falls into conflict with 
itself through considering its 
object from two different 
points of view. M. de Mairan 1 
regarded the controversy be- 
tween two famous astrono- 
mers, which arose from a 
similar difficulty in regard to 
choice of standpoint, as a 
sufficiently remarkable phe- 
nomenon to justify his writing 
a special treatise upon it. The 
one had argued that the 
moon revolves on its own 
axis, because it always turns 
the same side towards the 
earth. The other drew the 
opposite conclusion that the 
moon does not revolve on its 
own axis&gt; because it always 



[J. J. D. de Mairan (1678-1771).] 



420 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 



w 

Jo 408 



was not bound down to any 
sensible conditions, it was 
freed from the temporal con- 
dition which would require 
that its causality should itself 
have a beginning. But such 
procedure is entirely illegiti- 
mate, as may be gathered 
from what follows. 

In the strict meaning of the 
category, the contingent is 
so named because its contra- 
dictory opposite is possible. 
Now we cannot argue from 
empirical contingency to in- 
telligible contingency. When 
anything is altered, the op- 
posite of its state is actual 

* . 1.1 

at another time, and is there- 
fore possible. This present 
state is not, however, the 
contradictory opposite of the 
preceding state. To obtain 
such a contradictory opposite 
we require to conceive, that 
in the same time in which the 
preceding state was, its op- 
posite could have existed in 
its place, and this can never 
be inferred from [the fact of] 
the alteration. A body which 
was in motion (^A) comes 
to rest ( = non-A). Now from 
the fact that a state opposite 
to the state A follows upon 
the state A, we cannot argue 
that the contradictory op- 
posite of A is possible, and 
that A is therefore con- 
tingent. To prove such a 



turns the same side towards 
the earth. Both inferences 
were correct, according to the 
point of view which each 
chose in observing the moon's 
motion. 



FOURTH ANTINOMY 421 



conclusion, it would have to 
be shown that in place of the 
motion, and at the time at 
which it occurred, there could 
have been rest. All that we 
know is that rest was real in 
the time that followed upon 
the motion, and was therefore 
likewise possible. Motion at 
one time and rest at another 
time are not related as contra- 
dictory opposites. Accord- 
ingly the succession of op- 
posite determinations, that is, 
alteration, in no way estab- 
lishes contingency of the type 
represented in the concepts of 
pure understanding; and can- 
not therefore carry us to the 
existence of a necessary being, 
similarly conceived in purely 
intelligible terms. Alteration 
proves only empirical con- 
tingency; that is, that the 
new state, in the absence of 
a cause which belongs to the 
preceding time, could never 
of itself have taken place. 
Such is the condition pre- 
scribed by the law of causal- 
ity. This cause, even if it be 
viewed as absolutely neces- 
sary, must be such as can be 
thus met with in time, and 
must belong to the series of 
appearances. 



422 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

A 462 j THE ANTINOMY OF PURE REASON 

B 490 J 

Section 3 
THE INTEREST OF REASON IN THESE CONFLICTS 

We have now completely before us the dialectic play of 
cosmological ideas. The ideas are such that an object congruent 
with them can never be given in any possible experience, and 
that even in thought reason is unable to bring them into har- 
mony with the universal laws of nature. Yet they are not 
arbitrarily conceived. Reason, in the continuous advance of 
empirical synthesis, is necessarily led up to them whenever 
it endeavours to free from all conditions and apprehend in 
its unconditioned totality that which according to the rules 
of experience can never be determined save as conditioned. 
These pseudo-rational assertions are so many attempts to 
solve four natural and unavoidable problems of reason. There 
are just so many, neither more nor fewer, owing to the fact that 
there are just four series of synthetic presuppositions which 
impose a priori limitations on the empirical synthesis. 

The proud pretensions of reason, when it strives to extend 
its domain beyond all limits of experience, we have represented 
only in dry formulas that contain merely the ground of their 
B 491} legal claims. As befits a transcendental philosophy, they have 
been divested of all empirical features, although only in con- 
nection therewith can their full splendour be displayed. But 
in this empirical application, and in the progressive extension 
of the employment of reason, philosophy, beginning with the 
field of our experiences and steadily soaring to these lofty ideas, 
displays a dignity and worth such that, could it but make good 
its pretensions, it would leave all other human science far 
behind. For it promises a secure foundation for our high- 
est expectations in respect of those ultimate ends towards 
which all the endeavours of reason must ultimately converge. 
Whether the world has a beginning [in time] and any limit to 
its extension in space; whether there is anywhere, and perhaps 
in my thinking self, an indivisible and indestructible unity, 
or nothing but what is divisible and transitory; whether I am 
free in my actions or, like other beings, am led by the hand of 



ANTINOMY OF PURE REASON 423 

nature and of fate; whether finally there is a supreme cause 
of the world, or whether the things of nature and their order 
must as the ultimate object terminate thought an object that 
even in our speculations can never be transcended: these are 
questions for the solution of which the mathematician would 
gladly exchange the whole of his science. For mathematics 
can yield no satisfaction in regard to those highest ends that |g l^J 
most closely concern humanity. And yet the very dignity of 
mathematics (that pride of human reason) rests upon this, 
that it guides reason to knowledge of nature in its order and 
regularity alike in what is great in it and in what is small 
and in the extraordinary unity of its moving forces, thus 
rising to a degree of insight far beyond what any philosophy 
based on ordinary experience would lead us to expect; and 
so gives occasion and encouragement to an employment of 
reason that is extended beyond all experience, and at the same 
time supplies it with the most excellent materials for support- 
ing its investigations so far as the character of these permits 
by appropriate intuitions. 

Unfortunately for speculation, though fortunately perhaps 
for the practical interests of humanity, reason, in the midst of 
its highest expectations, finds itself so compromised by the 
conflict of opposing arguments, that neither its honour nor 
its security allows it to withdraw and treat the quarrel with 
indifference as a mere mock fight; and still less is it in a posi- 
tion to command peace, being itself directly interested in the 
matters in dispute. Accordingly, nothing remains for reason 
save to consider whether the origin of this conflict, whereby 
it is divided against itself, may not have arisen from a mere 
misunderstanding. In such an enquiry both parties, perchance, 
may have to sacrifice proud claims; but a lasting and peaceful 
reign 1 of reason over understanding and the senses would 
thereby be inaugurated. 

For the present we shall defer this thorough enquiry, in 
order first of all to consider upon which side we should prefer 
to fight, should we be compelled to make choice between 
the opposing parties. The raising of this question, how we 
should proceed if we consulted only our interest and not 
the logical criterion of truth, will decide nothing in regard to 
1 [Regiment.] 



424 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

the contested rights of the two parties, but has this advantage, 
that it enables us to comprehend why the participants in this 
quarrel, though not influenced by any superior insight into the 
matter under dispute, have preferred to fight on one side 
rather than on the other. It will also cast light on a number of 
incidental points, for instance, the passionate zeal of the one 
party and the calm assurance of the other; and will explain 
why the world hails the one with eager approval, and is im- 
placably prejudiced against the other. 

Comparison of the principles which form the starting- 
points of the two parties is what enables us, as we shall find, 
to determine the standpoint from which alone this preliminary 
enquiry can be carried out with the required thoroughness. In 
the assertions of the antithesis we observe a perfect uniformity 
in manner of thinking and complete unity of maxims, namely 
B 494} a principle of pure empiricism , applied not only in explana- 
tion of the appearances within the world, but also in the 
solution of the transcendental ideas of the world itself, in its 
totality. The assertions of the thesis, on the other hand, pre- 
suppose, in addition to the empirical mode of explanation 
employed within the series of appearances, intelligible begin- 
nings 1 ; and to this extent its maxim is complex. 2 But as its 
essential and distinguishing characteristic is the presupposi- 
tion of intelligible beginnings, I shall entitle it the dogmatism 
of pure reason. 

In the determination of the cosmological ideas, we find on 
the side of dogmatism, that is, of the thesis: 

First, a certain practical interest in which every right- 
thinking man, if he has understanding of what truly concerns 
him, heartily shares. That the world has a beginning, that my 
thinking self is of simple and therefore indestructible nature, 
that it is free in its voluntary actions and raised above the 
compulsion of nature, and finally that all order in the things 
constituting the world is due to a primordial being, 8 from which 
everything derives its unity and purposive connection these 
are so many foundation stones of morals and religion. The 
antithesis robs us of all these supports, or at least appears to 
do so. 

Secondly, reason has a speculative interest on the side of 

1 \intellektuelle Anfdnge.} * \nicht einfack.] * [Urwesen.] 



ANTINOMY OF PURE REASON 425 

the thesis. When the transcendental ideas are postulated and 
employed in the manner prescribed by the thesis, the entire 
chain of conditions and the derivation of the conditioned can 
be grasped completely a priori. For we then start from the 
unconditioned. This is not done by the antithesis, which for 
this reason is at a very serious disadvantage. To the question 
as to the conditions of its synthesis it can give no answer which 
does not lead to the endless renewal of the same enquiry. 
According to the antithesis, every given beginning compels us 
to advance to one still higher; every part leads to a still smaller 
part; every event is preceded by another event as its cause; and 
the conditions of existence in general rest always again upon 
other conditions, without ever obtaining unconditioned foot- 
ing and support in any self-subsistent thing, viewed as prim- 
ordial being. 

Thirdly, the thesis has also the advantage of popularity^ 
and this certainly forms no small part of its claim to favour. 
The common understanding finds not the least difficulty in the 
idea of the unconditioned beginning of all synthesis. Being 
more accustomed to descend to consequences than to ascend 
to'grounds, it does not puzzle over the possibility of the abso- 
lutely first; on the contrary, it finds comfort in such concepts, 
and at the same time a fixed point to which the thread by 
which it guides its movements can be attached. In the restless 
ascent from the conditioned to the condition, always with one 
foot in the air, there can be no satisfaction. 

In the determination of the cosmological ideas, we find on | * 
the side of empiricism^ that is, of the antithesis', first, no such 
practical interest (due to pure principles of reason) as is pro- 
vided for the thesis by morals and religion. On the contrary, 
pure empiricism appears to deprive them of all power and in- 
fluence. If there is no primordial being distinct from the world, 
if the world is without beginning and therefore without an 
Author, if our will is not free, and the soul is divisible and 
perishable like matter, moral ideas and principles lose all 
validity, and share in the fate of the transcendental ideas 
which served as their theoretical support. 

But secondly, in compensation, empiricism yields advan- 
tages to the speculative 1 interest of reason,, which are very 
1 ['Speculative' means for Kant theoretical, in distinction from the 'practical'.] 



426 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

attractive and far surpass those which dogmatic teaching 
bearing on the ideas of reason can offer. According to the 
principle of empiricism the understanding is always on its own 
proper ground, namely, the field of genuinely possible experi- 
ences, investigating their laws, and by means of these laws 
affording indefinite extension to the sure and comprehensible 
knowledge which it supplies. Here every object, both in itself 
and in its relations, can and ought to be represented in in- 
tuition, or at least in concepts for which the corresponding 
images can be clearly and distinctly provided in given similar 
intuitions. There is no necessity to leave the chain of the 

B ^j natural order and to resort to ideas, the objects of which are 
not known, because, as mere thought-entities, they can never 
be given. Indeed, the understanding is not permitted to leave 
its proper business, and under the pretence of having brought 
it to completion to pass over into the sphere of idealising 
reason and of transcendent concepts a sphere in which it 
is no longer necessary for it to observe and investigate in 
accordance with the laws of nature, but only to think and to 
invent?- in the assurance that it cannot be refuted by the facts 
of nature, not being bound by the evidence which they yield, 
but presuming to pass them by or even to subordinate them 
to a higher authority, namely, that of pure reason. 

The empiricist will never allow, therefore, that any epoch 
of nature is to be taken as the absolutely first, or that any 
limit of his insight into the extent of nature is to be regarded 
as the widest possible. Nor does he permit any transition from 
the objects of nature which he can analyse through observa- 
tion and mathematics, and synthetically determine in intuition 
(the extended) to those which neither sense nor imagination 
can ever represent in concrete (the simple). Nor will he admit 
the legitimacy of assuming in nature itself any power that 
operates independently of the laws of nature (freedom), and 
so of encroaching upon the business of the understanding, 
which is that of investigating, according to necessary rules, 

B 498; t ^ le or ig m f appearances. And, lastly, he will not grant 
that a cause ought ever to be sought outside nature, in an 
original being. We know nothing but nature, since it alone can 
present objects to. us and instruct us in regard to their laws. 

1 [dichtcn.] 



ANTINOMY OF PURE REASON 427 

If the empirical philosopher had no other purpose in pro- 
pounding his antithesis than to subdue the rashness and pre- 
sumption of those who so far misconstrue the true vocation of 
reason as to boast of insight and knowledge just where true in- 
sight and knowledge cease, and to represent as furthering spec- 
ulative interests that which is valid only in relation to practical 
interests (in order, as may suit their convenience, to break the 
thread of physical enquiries, and then under thepretence of ex- 
tending knowledge to fasten it to transcendental ideas, through 
which we really know only that we know nothing); if, I say, 
the empiricist were satisfied with this, his principle would be 
a maxim urging moderation in our pretensions, modesty in 
our assertions, and yet at the same time the greatest possible 
extension of our understanding, through the teacher fittingly 
assigned to us, namely, through experience. If such were our 
procedure, we should not be cut off from employing intel- 
lectual presuppositions and faith on behalf of our practical 
interest; only they could never be permitted to assume the | B *** 
title and dignity of science and rational insight. Knowledge, 
which as such is speculative, can have no other object than 
that supplied by experience; if we transcend the limits thus 
imposed, the synthesis which seeks, independently of experi- 
ence, new species of knowledge, lacks that substratum of 
intuition upon which alone it can be exercised. 

But when empiricism itself, as frequently happens, be- 
comes dogmatic in its attitude towards ideas, and confidently 
denies whatever lies beyond the sphere of its intuitive know- 
ledge, it betrays the same lack of modesty; and this is all the 
more reprehensible owing to the irreparable injury which is 
thereby caused to the practical interests of reason. 

The above antithesis constitutes the opposition between 
Epicureanism" and Platonism. 

It is, however, open to question whether Epicurus ever pro- 
pounded these principles as objective assertions. If perhaps they 
were for him nothing more than maxims for the speculative employ- 
ment of reason, then he showed in this regard a more genuine philo- 
sophical spirit than any other of the philosophers of antiquity. That, 
in explaining the appearances, we must proceed as if the field of our 
enquiry were not circumscribed by any limit or beginning of the 
world; that we must assume the material composing the world to 
be such as it must be if we are to learn about it from experience; 



428 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

B 500} Each of the two types of philosophy says more than it 
knows. The former encourages and furthers knowledge, 
though to the prejudice of the practical; the latter supplies 
excellent practical principles, but it permits reason to indulge 
in ideal explanations of natural appearances, in regard to 
which a speculative knowledge is alone possible to us to the 
neglect of physical investigation. 

Finally, as regards the third factor which has to be con- 
sidered in a preliminary choice between the two conflicting 
parties, it is extremely surprising that empiricism should be so 
universally unpopular. The common understanding, it might 
be supposed, would eagerly adopt a programme which pro- 
mises to satisfy it through exclusively empirical knowledge 
and the rational connections there revealed in preference to 
the transcendental dogmatism which compels it to rise to 
concepts far outstripping the insight and rational faculties 
O f the most practised thinkers. But this is precisely what com- 
mends such dogmatism to the common understanding. For it 
then finds itself in a position in which the most learned can 
claim no advantage over it. If it understands little or nothing 
about these matters, no one can boast of understanding much" 
more; and though in regard to them it cannot express itself in 
so scholastically correct a manner as those with special train- 
ing, nevertheless there is no end to the plausible arguments 
which it can propound, wandering as it does amidst mere ideas, 
about which no one knows anything, and in regard to which 
it is therefore free to be as eloquent as it pleases; whereas 



that we must postulate no other mode of the production of events 
than one which will enable them to be [regarded as] determined 
through unalterable laws of nature; and finally that no use must be 
B too} mac ^ e f an 7 cause distinct from the world all these principles still 
[retain their value]. They are very sound principles (though seldom 
observed) for extending the scope of speculative philosophy, while 
at the same time [enabling us] to discover the principles of morality 
without depending for this discovery upon alien [i.e. non-moral, 
theoretical] sources; and it does not follow in the least that those 
who require us, so long as we are occupied with mere speculation, 
to ignore these dogmatic propositions [that there is a limit and 
beginning to the wovld, a Divine Cause, etc.], can justly be accused 
of wishing to deny them. 



ANTINOMY OF PURE REASON 429 

when matters that involve the investigation of nature are in 
question, it has to stand silent and to admit its ignorance. Thus 
indolence and vanity combine in sturdy support of these prin- 
ciples. Besides, although the philosopher finds it extremely 
hard to accept a principle for which he can give no justifica- 
tion, still more to employ concepts the objective reality of which 
he is unable to establish, nothing is more usual in the case of 
the common understanding. It insists upon having something 
from which it can make a confident start. The difficulty of even 
conceiving this presupposed starting-point does not disquiet 
it. Since it is unaware what conceiving really means, it never 
occurs to it to reflect upon the assumption; it accepts as known 
whatever is familiar to it through frequent use. For the 
common understanding, indeed, all speculative interests pale 
before the practical; and it imagines that it comprehends and B 502 
knows what its fears or hopes incite it to assume or to believe. A 474 
Thus empiricism is entirely devoid of the popularity of tran- 
scendentally idealising reason 1 ; and however prejudicial such 
empiricism 2 may be to the highest practical principles, there 
is no need to fear that it will ever pass the limits of the Schools, 
and acquire any considerable influence in the general life or 
any real favour among the multitude. 

Human reason is by nature architectonic. That is to say, it 
regards all our knowledge as belonging to a possible system, 
and therefore allows only such principles as do not at any rate 
make it impossible for any knowledge that we may attain to 
combine into a system with other knowledge. But the proposi- 
tions of the antithesis are of such a kind that they render the 
completion of the edifice of knowledge quite impossible. They 
maintain that there is always to be found beyond every state 
of the world a more ancient state, in every part yet other parts 
similarly divisible, prior to every event still another event 
which itself again is likewise generated, and that in existence 
in general everything is conditioned, an unconditioned and 
first existence being nowhere discernible. Since, therefore, 
the antithesis thus refuses to admit as first or as a beginning 
anything that could serve as a foundation for building, a 

1 [Reading, with Erdmann, aller Popularity der Jranscendental-ideali' 
sierenden Vernunft for der transcendental-idealisierenden aller Popularitdt.} 
* [Reading, with Mellin, er . . . er for sie . . . .r*&gt;.] 



430 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

complete edifice of knowledge is, on such assumptions, alto- 
B 501} etner impossible. Thus the architectonic interest of reason 
the demand not for empirical but for pure a priori unity of 
reason forms a natural recommendation for the assertions 
of the thesis. 

If men could free themselves from all such interests, and 
consider the assertions of reason irrespective of their conse- 
quences, solely in view of the intrinsic force of their grounds, 
and were the only way of escape from their perplexities to 
give adhesion to one or other of the opposing parties, their 
state would be one of continuous vacillation. To-day it would 
be their conviction that the human will is free] to-morrow, 
dwelling in reflection upon the indissoluble chain of nature, 
they would hold that freedom is nothing but self-deception, 
that everything is simply nature. If, however, they were 
summoned to action, this play of the merely speculative 
reason would, like a dream, at once cease, and they would 
choose their principles exclusively in accordance with practi- 
cal interests. Since, however, it is fitting that a reflective and 
enquiring being should devote a certain amount of time to 
the examination of his own reason, entirely divesting himself 
of all partiality and openly submitting his observations to the 
judgment of others, no one can be blamed for, much less pro- 
B 504} hinted from, presenting for trial the two opposing parties, 
leaving them, terrorised by no threats, to defend themselves as 
best they can, before a jury of like standing with themselves, 
that is, before a jury of fallible men. 



THE ANTINOMY OF PURE REASON 
Section 4 

THE ABSOLUTE NECESSITY OF A SOLUTION OF THE 
TRANSCENDENTAL PROBLEMS OF PURE REASON 

To profess to solve all problems and to answer all questions 
would be impudent boasting, and would argue such extrava- 
gant self-conceit as at once to forfeit all confidence. Neverthe- 
less there are sciences the very nature of which requires that 
every question arising within their domain should be com- 



ANTINOMY OF PURE REASON 431 

pletely answerable in terms of what is known, inasmuch as the 
answer must issue from the same sources from which the 
question proceeds. In these sciences it is not permissible to 
plead unavoidable ignorance; the solution can be demanded. 
We must be able, in every possible case, in accordance with a 
rule, to know what is right and what is wrong, since this con- 
cerns our obligation, and we have no obligation to that which 
we cannot know. In the explanation of natural appearances, |g W 
on the other hand, much must remain uncertain and many 
questions insoluble, because what we know of nature is by no 
means sufficient, in all cases, to account for what has to be ex- 
plained. The question, therefore, is whether in transcendental 
philosophy there is any question relating to an object pre- 
sented to pure reason which is unanswerable by this reason, 
and whether we may rightly excuse ourselves from giving a 
decisive answer. In thus excusing ourselves, we should have 
to show that any knowledge which we can acquire still leaves 
us in complete uncertainty as to what should be ascribed to 
the object, and that while we do indeed have a concept suffi- 
cient to raise a question, we are entirely lacking in materials 
or "power to answer the same. 

Now I maintain that transcendental philosophy is unique 
in the whole field of speculative knowledge, in that no ques- 
tion which concerns an object given to pure reason can be 
insoluble for this same human reason, and that no excuse of 
an unavoidable ignorance, or of the problem's unfathomable 
depth, can release us from the obligation to answer it thor- 
oughly and completely. That very concept which puts us in a 
position to ask the question must also qualify us to answer it, 
since, as in the case of right and wrong, the object is not to be 
met with outside the concept. 

In transcendental philosophy, however, the only questions | 
to which we have the right to demand a sufficient answer 
bearing on the constitution of the object, and from answering 
which the philosopher is not permitted to excuse himself on 
the plea of their impenetrable obscurity, are the cosmological. 
These questions [bearing on the constitution of the object] 
must refer exclusively to cosmological ideas. For the object 
must be given empirically, the question being only as to its 
conformity to an idea. If, on the other hand, the object is 



432 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

transcendental, and therefore itself unknown; if, for instance, 
the question be whether that something, the appearance of 
which (in ourselves) is thought (soul), is in itself a simple being, 
whether there is an absolutely necessary cause of all things, 
and so forth, what we have then to do is in each case to seek 
an object for our idea; and we may well confess that this object 
B 507} is unknown to us, though not therefore impossible/ The cos- 
mological ideas alone have the peculiarity that they can pre- 
suppose their object, and the empirical synthesis required for 
its concept, as being given. The question which arises out of 
these ideas refers only to the advance in this synthesis, that 
is, whether it should be carried so far as to contain absolute 
totality such totality, since it cannot be given in any experi- 
ence, being no longer empirical. Since we are here dealing 
solely with a thing as object of a possible experience, not as a 
thing in itself, the answer to the transcendent cosmological 
question cannot lie anywhere save in the idea. We are not 
asking what is the constitution of any object in itself, nor 
as regards possible experience are we enquiring what can 
be given in concrete in any experience. Our sole question 
is as to what lies in the idea, to which the empirical synthesis 
can do no more than merely approximate; the question must 
therefore be capable of being solved entirely from the idea. 
Since the idea is a mere creature of reason, reason cannot 
disclaim its responsibility and saddle it upon the unknown 
object. 

a Although to the question, what is the constitution of a tran- 
scendental object, no answer can be given stating what it is, we can 
yet reply that the question itself is nothing, because there is no 
given object [corresponding] to it. Accordingly all questions dealt 
with in the transcendental doctrine of the soul are answerable in 
this latter manner, and have indeed been so answered; its 
questions refer to the transcendental subject of all inner appear- 
ances, which is not itself appearance and consequently not given 
A .as object, and in which none of the categories (and it is to them 
B 507} th at t* 16 question is really directed) meet with the conditions re- 
quired for their application. We have here a case where the com- 
mon saying holds, that no answer is itself an answer. A question 
as to the constitution of that something which cannot be thought 
through any determinate predicate inasmuch as it is completely 
outside the sphere of those objects which can be given to us is 
entirely null and void. 



ANTINOMY OF PURE REASON 433 

It is not so extraordinary as at first seems the case, that a |g ^ 
science should be in a position to demand and expect none but 
assured answers to all the questions within its domain (quae- 
stiones domesticae), although up to the present they have per- 
haps not been found. In addition to transcendental philosophy, 
there are two pure rational sciences, one purely speculative, 
the other with a practical content, namely, pure mathematics 
and pure ethics. Has it ever been suggested that, because of 
our necessary ignorance of the conditions, it must remain un- 
certain what exact relation, in rational or irrational numbers, 
a diameter bears to a circle? Since no adequate solution in 
terms of rational numbers is possible, and no solution in terms 
of irrational numbers has yet been discovered, it was con- 
cluded that at least the impossibility of a solution can be 
known with certainty, and of this impossibility Lambert 1 has 
given the required proof. In the universal principles of morals 
nothing can be uncertain, because the principles are either 
altogether void and meaningless, or must be derived from 
the concepts of our reason. In natural science, on the other 
hand, there is endless conjecture, and certainty is not to be 
counted upon. For the natural appearances are objects which 
are given to us independently of our concepts, and the key to 
them lies not in us and our pure thinking, but outside us; and 
therefore in many cases, since the key is not to be found, an \B 509 
assured solution is not to be expected. I am not, of course, here 
referring to those questions of the Transcendental Analytic 
which concern the deduction of our pure knowledge; we are 
at present treating only of the certainty of judgments with 
respect to their objects and not with respect to the source of 
our concepts themselves. 

The obligation of an at least critical solution of the ques- 
tions which reason thus propounds to itself, we cannot, there- 
fore, escape by complaints of the narrow limits of our reason, 
and by confessing, under the pretext of a humility based on self- 
knowledge, that it is beyond the power of our reason to deter- 
mine whether the world exists from eternity or has a begin- 
ning; whether cosmical space is filled with beings to infinitude, 

1 [J. H. Lambert (1728-77). The proof that ir is incommensurable, Lambert 
communicated, in a memoir on transcendental magnitudes, to the Berlin Academy 
in 1768.] 

2 F 



434 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

or is enclosed within certain limits; whether anything in the 
world is simple, or everything such as to be infinitely divisible; 
whether there is generation and production through freedom, 
or whether everything depends on the chain of events in the 
natural order; and finally whether there exists any being com- 
pletely unconditioned and necessary in itself, or whether every- 
thing is conditioned in its existence and therefore dependent on 
external things and itself contingent. All these questions refer 
to an object which can be found nowhere save in our thoughts, 
namely, to the absolutely unconditioned totality of the syn- 
thesis of appearances. If from our own concepts we are unable 

B 510} to assert an d determine anything certain, we must not throw 
the blame upon the object as concealing itself from us. Since 
such an object is nowhere to be met with outside our idea, it is 
not possible for it to be given. The cause of failure we must 
seek in our idea itself. For so long as we obstinately persist 
in assuming that there is an actual object corresponding to 
the idea, the problem, as thus viewed, allows of no solution. A 
clear exposition of the dialectic which lies within our concept 
itself would soon yield us complete certainty how we ought 
to judge in reference to such a question. 

The pretext that we are unable to obtain certainty in regard 
to these problems can be at once met with the following question 
which certainly calls for a clear answer: Whence come those 
ideas, the solution of which involves us in such difficulty? Is it, 
perchance, appearances that demand explanation, and do we, 
in accordance with these ideas, have to seek only the principles 
or rules of their exposition? Even if we suppose the whole of 
nature to be spread out before us, and that of all that is pre- 
sented to our intuition nothing is concealed from our senses and 
consciousness, yet still through no experience could the object 
of our ideas be known by us in concrete. For that purpose, in 

A 483! addition to this exhaustive intuition, we should require what 
is not possible through any empirical knowledge, namely, a 
completed synthesis and the consciousness of its absolute 
totality. Accordingly our question does not require to be raised 
in the explanation of any given appearance, and is therefore 
not a question which can be regarded as imposed on us by 
the object itself* The object can never come before us, since 
it cannot be given through any possible experience. In all 



ANTINOMY OF PURE REASON 435 

possible perceptions we always remain involved in conditions, 
whether in space or in time, and come upon nothing un- 
conditioned requiring us to determine whether this uncondi- 
tioned is to be located in an absolute beginning of synthesis, 
or in an absolute totality of a series that has no beginning. 
In its empirical meaning, the term 'whole* is always only com- 
parative. The absolute whole of quantity (the universe), the 
whole of division, of derivation, of the condition of existence 
in general, with all questions as to whether it is brought about 
through finite synthesis or through a synthesis requiring infinite 
extension, have nothing to do with any possible experience. 
We should not, for instance, in any wise be able to explain the 
appearances of a body better, or even differently, in assuming 
that it consisted either of simple or of inexhaustibly com- 
posite parts; for neither a simple appearance nor an infinite 
composition can ever come before us. Appearances demand 
explanation only so far as the conditions of their explanation 
are given in perception; but all that may ever be given in this B 512 
way, when taken together in an absolute whole&gt; is not 1 itself A 484 
a perception. Yet it is just the explanation of this very 
whole that is demanded in the transcendental problems of 
reason. 

Thus the solution of these problems can never be found 
in experience, and this is precisely the reason why we should 
not say that it is uncertain what should be ascribed to the 
object [of our idea]. For as our object is only in our brain, 
and cannot be given outside it, we have only to take care to 
be at one with ourselves, and to avoid that amphiboly which 
transforms our idea into a supposed representation of an 
object that is empirically given and therefore to be known 
according to the laws of experience. The dogmatic solution is 
therefore not only uncertain, but impossible. The critical solu- 
tion, which allows of complete certainty, does not consider the 
question objectively, but in relation to the foundation of the 
knowledge upon which the question is based. 

1 [Reading, with Mellin, keine for eine.] 



436 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

THE ANTINOMY OF PURE REASON 
Section 5 

SCEPTICAL REPRESENTATION OF THE COSMOLOGICAL 
QUESTIONS IN THE FOUR TRANSCENDENTAL IDEAS 

We should of ourselves desist from the demand that our 
questions be answered dogmatically, if from the start we 
understood that whatever the dogmatic answer might turn out 
to be it would only increase our ignorance, and cast us from 
one inconceivability into another, from one obscurity into 
another still greater, and perhaps even into contradictions. If 
our question is directed simply to a yes or no, we are well 
advised to leave aside the supposed grounds of the answer, and 
first consider what we should gain according as the answer is 
in the affirmative or in the negative. Should we then find that 
in both cases the outcome is mere nonsense, 1 there will be good 
reason for instituting a critical examination of our question, to 
determine whether the question does not itself rest on a ground- 
less presupposition, in that it plays with an idea the falsity of 
which can be more easily detected through study of its applica- 
tion and consequences than in its own separate representation. 
B 514} This is the great utility of the sceptical mode of dealing with 
the questions which pure reason puts to pure reason. By its 
means we can deliver ourselves, at but a small cost, from a 
great body of sterile dogmatism, and set in its place a sober 
critique, which as a true cathartic will effectively guard us 
against such groundless beliefs and the supposed polymathy 
to which they lead. 

If therefore, in dealing with a cosmological idea, I were 
able to appreciate beforehand that whatever view may be 
taken of the unconditioned in the successive synthesis of ap- 
pearances, it must either be too large or too small for any con- 
cept of the understanding^ I should be in a position to under- 
stand that since the cosmological idea has no bearing save 
upon an object of experience which has to be in conformity 
with a possible concept of the understanding, it must be 

1 [Kant here plays on the double meaning of sinnleeres, "empty of sense" 
and "nonsense".] 



ANTINOMY OF PURE REASON 437 

entirely empty and without meaning; for its object, view it as 
we may, cannot be made to agree with it. This is in fact the 
case with all cosmical concepts; and this is why reason, so 
long as it holds to them, is involved in an unavoidable 
antinomy. For suppose: 

First, that the world has no beginning: it is then too large 
for our concept, which, consisting as it does in a successive 
regress, can never reach the whole eternity that has elapsed. 
Or suppose that the world has a beginning, it will then, in the 
necessary empirical regress, be too small for the concept of | 
the understanding. For since the beginning still presupposes a 
time which precedes it, it is still not unconditioned; and the law 
of the empirical employment of the understanding therefore 
obliges us to look for a higher temporal condition; and the 
world [as limited in time] is therefore obviously too small for 
this law. 

This is also true of the twofold answer to the question 
regarding the magnitude of the world in space. If it is infinite 
and unlimited, it is too large for any possible empirical con- 
cept. If it is finite and limited, we have a right to ask what 
determines these limits. Empty space is no self-subsistent 
correlate of things, and cannot be a condition at which we 
could stop; still less can it be an empirical condition, forming 
part of a possible experience. (For how can there be any ex- 
perience of the absolutely void?) And yet to obtain absolute 
totality in the empirical synthesis it is always necessary that 
the unconditioned be an empirical concept. Consequently, a 
limited world is too small for our concept. 

Secondly, if every appearance in space (matter) consists of 
infinitely many parts, the regress in the division will always 
be too great for our concept; while if the division of space is 
to stop at any member of the division (the simple), the regress 
will be too small for the idea of the unconditioned. For this 
member always still allows of a regress to further parts con- ( 
tained in it. 

Thirdly, if we suppose that nothing happens in the world 
save in accordance with the laws of nature, the causality of 
the cause will always itself be something that happens, making 
necessary a regress to a still higher cause, and thus a con- 
tinuation of the series of conditions a parte priori without end. 



438 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

Nature, as working always through efficient causes, is thus 
too large for any of the concepts which we can employ in the 
synthesis of cosmical events. 

If, in certain cases, we admit the occurrence of self-caused 
events, that is, generation through freedom^ then by an un- 
avoidable law of nature the question 'why* still pursues us, 
constraining us, in accordance with the law of causality 
[which governs] experience, 1 to pass beyond such events; and 
we thus find that such totality of connection is too small for 
our necessary empirical concept. 

Fourthly^ if we admit an absolutely necessary being 
(whether it be the world itself, or something in the world, or 
the cause of the world), we set it in a time infinitely remote 
from any given point of time, because otherwise it would be 
dependent upon another and antecedent being. But such an 
existence is then too large for our empirical concept, and is 
unapproachable through any regress, however far this be 
carried. 

3 ^7 j If, again, we hold that everything belonging to the world 
(whether as conditioned or as condition) is contingent, any 
and every given existence is too small for our concept. ]?or 
we are constrained always still to look about for some other 
existence upon which it is dependent. 

We have said that in all these cases the cosmical idea is 
either too large or too small for the empirical regress, and 
therefore for any possible concept of the understanding. We 
have thus been maintaining that the fault lies with the idea, in 
being too large or too small for that to which it is directed, 
namely, possible experience. Why have we not expressed our- 
selves in the opposite manner, saying that in the former case 
the empirical concept is always too small for the idea, and in 
the latter too large, and that the blame therefore attaches to 
the empirical regress? The reason is this. Possible experience 
is that which can alone give reality to our concepts; in its 
absence a concept is a mere idea, without truth, that is, without 
relation to any object. The possible empirical concept is there- 
fore the standard by which we must judge whether the idea 
is a mere idea and thought-entity, or whether it finds its object 
in the world. For we can say of anything that it is too large 

1 \der Erfahrung^ 



ANTINOMY OF PURE REASON 439 

or too small relatively to something else, only if the former is 
required for the sake of the latter, and has to be adapted to it. 
Among the puzzles propounded in the ancient dialectical {3 5?8 
Schools was the question, whether, if a ball cannot pass 
through a hole, we should say that the ball is too large or the 
hole too small. In such a case it is a matter of indifference 
how we choose to express ourselves, for we do not know which 
exists for the sake of the other. In the case, however, of a man 
and his coat, we do not say that a man is too tall for his coat, 
but that the coat is too short for the man. 

We have thus been led to what is at least a well-grounded 
suspicion that the cosmological ideas, and with them all the 
mutually conflicting pseudo-rational assertions, may perhaps 
rest on an empty and merely fictitious concept of the manner 
in which the object of these ideas is given to us; and this sus- 
picion may set us on the right path for laying bare the illusion 
which has so long led us astray. 



THE ANTINOMY OF PURE REASON 
Section 6 

TRANSCENDENTAL IDEALISM AS THE KEY TO THE 
SOLUTION OF THE COSMOLOGICAL DIALECTIC 

We have sufficiently proved in the Transcendental Aesthetic 
that everything intuited in space or time, and therefore all 
objects of any experience possible to us, are nothing but ap- 
pearances, that is, mere representations, which, in the manner | B f J* 
in which they are represented, as extended beings, or as series of 
alterations, have no independent existence outside our thoughts. 
This doctrine I entitle transcendental idealism? 1 The realist, in 
the transcendental meaning of this term, treats these modifica- 
tions of our sensibility as self-subsistent things, that is, treats 
mere representations as things in themselves. 

It would be unjust to ascribe to us that long -decried 

I have also, elsewhere, sometimes entitled it formal idealism, 
to distinguish it from material idealism, that is, from the usual type 
of idealism which doubts or denies the existence of outer things 
themselves. [Note added in B.] 



440 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

empirical idealism, which, while it admits the genuine reality 
of space, denies the existence of the extended beings in it, or 
at least considers their existence doubtful, and so does not 
in this regard allow of any properly demonstrable distinction 
between truth and dreams. As to the appearances of inner 
sense in time, empirical idealism finds no difficulty in regard- 
ing them as real things; indeed it even asserts that this inner 
experience is the sufficient as well as the only proof of the 
actual existence of its object (in itself, with 1 all this time- 
determination). 

B 520 Our transcendental idealism, on the contrary, admits the 
reality of the objects of outer intuition, as intuited in space, and 
of all changes in time, as represented by inner sense. For since 
space is a form of that intuition which we entitle outer, and 

A 492 since without objects in space there would be no empirical re- 
presentation whatsoever, we can and must regard the extended 
beings in it as real; and the same is true of time. But this space 
and this time, and with them all appearances, are not in them- 
selves things', they are nothing but representations, and cannot 
exist outside our mind. Even the inner and sensible intuition 
of our mind (as object of consciousness) which is represented 
as being determined by the succession of different states in 
time, is not the self proper, as it exists in itself that is, is not 
the transcendental subject but only an appearance that has 
been given to the sensibility of this, to us unknown, being. 
This inner appearance cannot be admitted to exist in any such 
manner in and by itself; for it is conditioned by time, and time 
cannot be a determination of a thing in itself. The empirical 
truth of appearances in space and time is, however, sufficiently 

B 521 secured; it is adequately distinguished from dreams, if both 
dreams and genuine appearances cohere truly and completely 
in one experience, in accordance with empirical laws. 

The objects of experience, then, are never given in them- 
selves, but only in experience, and have no existence outside it. 

A 493 That there may be inhabitants in the moon, although no one 
has ever perceived them, must certainly be admitted. This, 
however, only means that in the possible advance of experi- 
ence we may encounter them. For everything is real which 
stands in connection with a perception in accordance with the 

1 [Reading, with Erdmann, sclbst t *'/.] 



ANTINOMY OF PURE REASON 441 

laws of empirical advance. They are therefore real if they 
stand in an empirical connection with my actual consciousness, 
although they are not for that reason real in themselves, that 
is, outside this advance of experience. 

Nothing is really given us save perception and the empiri- 
cal advance from this to other possible perceptions. For the 
appearances, as mere representations, are in themselves real 
only in perception, which perception is in fact nothing but the 
reality of an empirical representation, that is, appearance. To 
call an appearance a real thing prior to our perceiving it, either 
means that in the advance of experience we must meet with 
such a perception, or it means nothing at all. For if we were 
speaking of a thing in itself, we could indeed say that it exists 
in itself apart from relation to our senses and possible experi- 
ence. But we are here speaking only of an appearance in space B 522 
and time, which 1 are not determinations of things in them- 
selves but only of our sensibility. Accordingly, that which is in 
space and time is an appearance; it is not anything in itself A 494 
but consists merely of representations, which, if not given in 
us that is to say, in perception are nowhere to be met with. 

The faculty of sensible intuition is strictly only a recep- 
tivity, a capacity of being affected in a certain manner with 
representations, 2 the relation of which to one another is a pure 
intuition of space and of time (mere forms of our sensibility), 
and which, in so far as they are connected in this manner in 
space and time, and are determinable according to laws of the 
unity of experience, are entitled objects. The non-sensible cause 
of these representations is completely unknown to us, and cannot 
therefore be intuited by us as object. For such an object would 
have to be represented as neither in space nor in time (these 
being merely conditions of sensible representation), and apart 
from such conditions we cannot think any intuition. We may, 
however, entitle the purely intelligible cause of appearances in 
general the transcendental object, but merely in order to have 
something corresponding to sensibility viewed as a receptivity. 
To this transcendental object we can ascribe the whole extent 
and connection of our possible perceptions, and can say that it B 523 
is given in itself prior to all experience. But the appearances, 

1 [Reading, with Vorlander, die beide for Jtt beides.] 
8 \rnit Vorstellungen affiziert zu werden.] 



442 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

while conforming to it, are not given in themselves, but only in 
this experience, being mere representations, which as percep- 

A 495 tions can mark out 1 a real object only in so far as the perception 
connects with all others according to the rules of the unity of 
experience. Thus we can say that the real things of past time 
are given in the transcendental object of experience; but they 
are objects for me and real in past time only in so far as I repre- 
sent to myself (either by the light of history or by the guiding- 
clues of causes and effects) that a regressive series of possible 
perceptions in accordance with empirical laws, in a word, that 
the course of the world, conducts us to a past time-series as con- 
dition of the present time a series which, however, can be re- 
presented as actual not in itself but only in the connection of a 
possible experience. Accordingly, all events which have taken 
place in the immense periods that have preceded my own ex- 
istence mean really nothing but the possibility of extending the 
chain of experience from the present perception back to the 
conditions which determine this perception in respect of time. 
If, therefore, I represent to myself all existing objects of 
the senses in all time and in all places, I do not set them in 
space and time [as being there] prior to experience. Th'is 

B 524 representation is nothing but the thought of a possible ex- 
perience in its absolute completeness. Since the objects are 
nothing but mere representations, only in such a possible 

A 496 experience are they given. To say that they exist prior to 
all my experience is only to assert that they are to be met 
with if, starting from perception, I advance to that part of 
experience to which they belong. The cause of the empirical 
conditions of this advance (that which determines what mem- 
bers I shall meet with, or how far I can meet with any such 
in my regress) is transcendental, and is therefore necessarily 
unknown to me. We are not, however, concerned with this 
transcendental cause, but only with the rule of the advance in 
the experience in which objects, that is to say, appearances, 
are given to me. Moreover, in outcome it is a matter of in- 
difference whether I say that in the empirical advance in 
space I can meet with stars a hundred times farther removed 
than the outermost now perceptible to me, or whether I say 
that they are perhaps to be met with in cosmical space even 

1 \bcdeut en. \ 



ANTINOMY OF PURE REASON 443 

though no human being has ever perceived or ever will per- 
ceive them. For even supposing they were given as things in 
themselves, without relation to possible experience, it still 
remains true that they are nothing to me, and therefore are 
not objects, save in so far as they are contained in the series of 
the empirical regress. Only in another sort of relation, when 
these appearances would be used for the cosmological idea of 
an absolute whole, and when, therefore, we are dealing with a B 525 
question which oversteps the limits of possible experience, 
does distinction of the mode in which we view the reality of 
those objects of the senses become of importance, as serving A 497 
to guard us against a deceptive error which is bound to arise 
if we misinterpret our empirical concepts. 



THE ANTINOMY OF PURE REASON 
Section 7 

CRITICAL SOLUTION OF THE COSMOLOGICAL CONFLICT 
OF REASON WITH ITSELF 

The whole antinomy of pure reason rests upon the dia- 
lectical argument: If the conditioned is given, the entire series 
of all its conditions is likewise given; objects of the senses are 
given as conditioned; therefore, etc. Through this syllogism, 
the major premiss of which appears so natural and evident, as 
many cosmological ideas are introduced as there are differ- 
ences in the conditions (in the synthesis of appearances) that 
constitute a series. The ideas postulate absolute totality of 
these series; and thereby they set reason in unavoidable 
conflict with itself. We shall be in a better position to detect 
what is deceptive in this pseudo-rational argument, if we first B 526 
correct and define some of the concepts employed in it. 

In the first place, it is evident beyond all possibility of 
doubt, that if the conditioned is given, a regress in the series of A 498 
all its conditions is set us as a task. 1 For it is involved in the 
very concept of the conditioned that something is referred to a 
condition, and if this condition is again itself conditioned, to a 
more remote condition, and so through all the members of the 

1 [aufgegeben.] 



444 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

series. The above proposition is thus analytic, and has nothing 
to fear from a transcendental criticism. It is a logical postulate 
of reason, that through the understanding we follow up and 
extend as far as possible that connection of a concept with its 
conditions which directly results from the concept itself. 

Further, if the conditioned as well as its condition are 
things in themselves, then upon the former being given, the 
regress to the latter is not only set as a task, but therewith 
already really given. And since this holds of all members of 
the series, the complete series of the conditions, and therefore 
the unconditioned, is given therewith, or rather is presupposed 
in view of the fact that the conditioned, which is only possible 
through the complete series, is given. The synthesis of the 
conditioned with its condition is here a synthesis of the mere 
understanding, which represents things as they are, without 

B 527 considering whether and how we can obtain knowledge of 
them. If, however, what we are dealing with are appearances 
as mere representations appearances cannot be given save 

A 499 in so far as I attain knowledge of them, or rather attain them 
in themselves, for they are nothing but empirical modes of 
knowledge I cannot say, in the same sense of the terms, that 
if the conditioned is given, all its conditions (as appearances) 
are likewise given, and therefore cannot in any way infer the 
absolute totality of the series of its conditions. The appear- 
ances are in their apprehension themselves nothing but an 
empirical synthesis in space and time, and are given only in 
this synthesis. It does not, therefore, follow, that if the con- 
ditioned, in the [field of] appearance, is given, the synthesis 
which constitutes its empirical condition is given therewith 
and is presupposed. This synthesis first occurs in the regress, 
and never exists without it. What we can say is that a regress 
to the conditions, that is, a continued empirical synthesis, on 
the side of the conditions, is enjoined or set as a task, and that 
in this regress there can be no lack of given conditions. 

These considerations make it clear that the major premiss 
of the cosmological inference takes the conditioned in the 
transcendental sense of a pure category, while the minor pre- 
miss takes it in the empirical sense of a concept of the under- 
standing applied- to mere appearances. The argument thus 

B 528 commits that dialectical fallacy which is entitled sophisma 



ANTINOMY OF PURE REASON 445 

figurae dictionis. This fallacy is not, however, an artificial A 500 
one; a quite natural illusion of our common reason leads 
us, when anything is given as conditioned, thus to assume in 
the major premiss, as it were without thought or question, its 
conditions and their series. This assumption is indeed simply 
the logical requirement that we should have adequate pre- 
misses for any given conclusion. Also, there is no reference to a 
time-order in the connection of the conditioned with its con- 
dition; they are presupposed as given together with it. Further, 
it is no less natural, in the minor premiss, to regard appear- 
ances both as things in themselves and as objects given to the 
pure understanding, than to proceed as we have done in the 
major, in which we have [similarly] abstracted from all those 
conditions of intuition under which alone objects can be given. 
Yet in so doing we have overlooked an important distinction 
between the concepts. The synthesis of the conditioned with 
its conditions (and the whole series of the latter) does not in 
the major premiss carry with it any limitation through time 
or any concept of succession. The empirical synthesis, on the 
other hand, that is, the series of the conditions in appearance, 
as subsumed in the minor premiss, is necessarily successive, 
the members of the series being given only as following upon 
one another in time; and I have therefore, in this case, no right 
to assume the absolute totality of the synthesis and of the 
series thereby represented. In the major premiss all the mem- B 529 
bers of the series are given in themselves, without any condi- 
tion of time, but in this minor premiss they are possible only 
through the successive regress, which is given only in the A 501 
process in which it is actually carried out. 

When this error has thus been shown to be involved in the 
argument upon which both parties alike base their cosmo- 
logical assertions, both might justly be dismissed, as being 
unable to offer any sufficient title in support of their claims. 
But the quarrel is not thereby ended as if one or both of the 
parties had been proved to be wrong in the actual doctrines 
they assert, that is, in the conclusions of their arguments. For 
although they have failed to support their contentions by valid 
grounds of proof, nothing seems to be clearer than that since 
one of them asserts that the world has a beginning and the 
other that it has no beginning and is from eternity, one of the 



446 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

two must be in the right. But even if this be so, none the less, 
since the arguments on both sides are equally clear, it is im- 
possible to decide between them. The parties may be com- 
manded to keep the peace before the tribunal of reason; but the 
controversy none the less continues. There can therefore be no 
way of settling it once for all and to the satisfaction of both 
sides, save by their becoming convinced that the very fact of 
their being able so admirably to refute one another is evidence 
that they are really quarrelling about nothing, and that a 
certain transcendental illusion has mocked them with a reality 
A 502} where none is to be found. This is the path which we shall now 
proceed to follow in the settlement of a dispute that defies all 
attempts to come to a decision. 



Zeno of Elea, a subtle dialectician, was severely repri- 
manded by Plato as a mischievous Sophist who, to show his 
skill, would set out to prove a proposition through convincing 
arguments and then immediately overthrow them by other 
arguments equally strong. Zeno maintained, for example, that 
God (probably conceived by him as simply the world) 4 is 
neither finite nor infinite, neither in motion nor at rest, neither 
similar nor dissimilar to any other thing. To the critics of his 
procedure he appeared to have the absurd intention of denying 
both of two mutually contradictory propositions. But this ac- 
cusation does not seem to me to be justified. The first of his 
propositions I shall consider presently more in detail. As re- 
gards the others, if by the word 'God' he meant the universe, he 
would certainly have to say that it is neither abidingly present 
in its place, that is, at rest, nor that it changes its place, that is, 
is in motion; because all places are in the universe, and the 
universe is not, therefore, itself in any place. Again, if the 
universe comprehends in itself everything that exists, it cannot 
be either similar or dissimilar to any other thing, because 
B 531 there is no other thing, nothing outside it, with which it could 
A 503 be compared. If two opposed judgments presuppose an inad- 
missible condition, then in spite of their opposition, which does 
not amount to a contradiction strictly so-called, both fall to the 
ground, inasmuch as the condition, under which alone either 
of them can be maintained, itself falls. 



ANTINOMY OF PURE REASON 447 

If it be said that all bodies have either a good smell or a 
smell that is not good, a third case is possible, namely, that 
a body has no smell at all; and both the conflicting proposi- 
tions may therefore be false. If, however, I say: all bodies are 
either good-smelling or not good-smelling (vel suaveolens vel 
non suaveolens), the two judgments are directly contradictory 
to one another, and the former only is false, its contradictory 
opposite, namely, that some bodies are not good-smelling, 
comprehending those bodies also which have no smell at all. 
Since, in the previous opposition (per disparata), smell, the 
contingent condition of the concept of the body, 1 was not 
removed by the opposed judgment, but remained attached 
to it, the two judgments were not related as contradictory 
opposites. 

If, therefore, we say that the world is either infinite in 
extension or is not infinite (non est infinitus)&gt; and if the former 
proposition is false, its contradictory opposite, that the world 
is not infinite, must be true. And I should thus deny the exist- 
ence of an infinite world, without affirming in its place a finite 
world. But if we had said that the world is either infinite or finite |g 54 
(non-infinite), both statements might be false. For in that case 
we should be regarding the world in itself as determined in its 
magnitude, and in the opposed judgment we do not merely 
remove the infinitude, and with it perhaps the entire separate 
existence of the world, but attach a determination to the world, 
regarded as a thing actually existing in itself. This assertion 
may, however, likewise be false; the world may not be given 
as a thing in itself, nor as being in its magnitude either infinite 
or finite. I beg permission to entitle this kind of opposition 
dialectical, and that of contradictories analytical. Thus of 
two dialectically opposed judgments both may be false; for 
the one is not a mere contradictory of the other, but says 
something more than is required for a simple contradiction. 

If we regard the two propositions, that the world is infinite 
in magnitude and that it is finite in magnitude, as contra- 
dictory opposites, we are assuming that the world, the com- 
plete series of appearances, is a thing in itself that remains 
even if I suspend the infinite or the finite regress in the series 
of its appearances. If, however, I reject this assumption, or 
1 [Reading, with Hartenstein, des Korpers for der Korper.} 



448 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

rather this accompanying transcendental illusion, and deny 
g 5 s | that the world is a thing in itself, the contradictory opposition 
of the two assertions is converted into a merely dialectical 
opposition. Since the world does not exist in itself, independ- 
ently of the regressive series of my representations, it exists 
in itself neither as an infinite whole nor as a finite whole. It 
exists only in the empirical regress of the series of appear- 
ances, and is not to be met with as something in itself. If, then, 
this series is always conditioned, and therefore can never be 
given as complete, the world is not an unconditioned whole, 
and does not exist as such a whole, either of infinite or of 
finite magnitude. 

What we have here said of the first cosmological idea, 
that is, of the absolute totality of magnitude in the [field 
of] appearance, applies also to all the others. The series of 
conditions is only to be met with in the regressive synthesis 
itself, not in the [field of] appearance viewed as a thing given 
in and by itself, prior to all regress. We must therefore say that 
the number of parts in a given appearance is in itself neither 
finite nor infinite. For an appearance is not something existing 
in itself, and its parts are first given in and through the regress 
of the decomposing synthesis, 1 a regress which is never given 
in absolute completeness, either as finite or as infinite. This 
also holds of the series of subordinated causes, and of the 
series that proceeds from the conditioned to unconditioned 
B 534} necessar y existence. These series can never be regarded as 
being in themselves in their totality either finite or infinite. 
Being series of subordinated representations &gt; they exist only 
in the dynamical regress, and prior to this regress can have no 
existence in themselves as self-subsistent series of things. 

Thus the antinomy of pure reason in its cosmological ideas 
vanishes when it is shown that it is merely dialectical, and 
that it is a conflict due to an illusion which arises from our 
applying to appearances that exist only in our representations, 
and therefore, so far as they form a series, not otherwise than 
in a successive regress, that idea of absolute totality which 
holds only as a condition of things in themselves. From this 
antinomy we can, however, obtain, not indeed a dogmatic, but 
a critical and doctrinal advantage. It affords indirect proof of 

1 [der dekomponierenden Synthesis^ 



ANTINOMY OF PURE REASON 449 

the transcendental ideality of appearances a proof which 
ought to convince any who may not be satisfied by the direct 
proof given in the Transcendental Aesthetic. This proof would 
consist in the following dilemma. If the world is a whole exist- 
ing in itself, it is either finite or infinite. But both alternatives 
are false (as shown in the proofs of the antithesis and thesis 
respectively). It is therefore also false that the world (the 
sum of all appearances) is a whole existing in itself. From this 
it then follows that appearances in general are nothing outside 
our representations which is just what is meant by their 
transcendental ideality. 

This remark is of some importance. It enables us to see 
that the proofs given in the fourfold antinomy are not merely 
baseless deceptions. On the supposition that appearances, and 
the sensible world which comprehends them all, are things 
in themselves, these proofs are indeed well-grounded. The 
conflict which results from the propositions thus obtained 
shows, however, that there is a fallacy in this assumption, and 
so leads us to the discovery of the true constitution of things, 
as objects of the senses. While the transcendental dialectic does 
not by any means favour scepticism, it certainly does favour 
the sceptical method, which can point to such dialectic as an 
example of its great services. For when the arguments of 
reason are allowed to oppose one another in unrestricted 
freedom, something advantageous, and likely to aid in the 
correction of our judgments, will always accrue, though it 
may not be what we set out to find. 



THE ANTINOMY OF PURE REASON 5 

1 B 530 

Section 8 

THE REGULATIVE PRINCIPLE OF PURE REASON IN ITS 
APPLICATION TO THE COSMOLOGICAL IDEAS 

Since no maximum of the series of conditions in a sensible 
world, regarded as a thing in itself, is given through the cos- 
mological principle of totality, but can only be set as a task 
that calls for regress in the series of conditions, the principle 
of pure reason has to be amended in these terms; and it 

2 G 



450 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

then preserves its validity, not indeed as the axiom that we 
think the totality as actually in the object, but as a problem for 
the understanding, and therefore for the subject, leading it to 
undertake and to carry on, in accordance with the completeness 
prescribed by the idea, the regress in the series of conditions of 
any given conditioned. For in our sensibility, that is, in space 
and time, every condition to which we can attain in the 
exposition of given appearances is again conditioned. For 
they are not objects in themselves were they such, the abso- 
lutely unconditioned might be found in them but simply 
empirical representations which must always find in intui- 
tion the condition that determines them in space and time. 
The principle of reason is thus properly only a rule y pre- 
B ^ j scribing a regress in the series of the conditions of given 
appearances, and forbidding it to bring the regress to a close 
by treating anything at which it may arrive as absolutely un- 
conditioned. It is not a principle of the possibility of experience 
and of empirical knowledge of objects of the senses, and there- 
fore not a principle of the understanding; for every experience, 
in conformity with the given [forms of] intuition, is enclosed 
within limits. Nor is it a constitutive principle of reason, en- 
abling us to extend our concept of the sensible world beyond all 
possible experience. It is rather a principle of the greatest pos- 
sible continuation and extension of experience, allowing no em- 
pirical limit to hold as absolute. Thus it is a principle of reason 
which serves as a rule, postulating what we ought to do in the 
regress, but not anticipating what is present 1 in the object as 
it is in itself, prior to all regress. Accordingly I entitle it a 
regulative principle of reason, to distinguish it from the prin- 
ciple of the absolute totality of the series of conditions, viewed 
as actually present in the object (that is, in the appearances), 2 
which would be a constitutive cosmological principle. I have 
tried to show by this distinction that there is no such con- 
stitutive principle, and so to prevent what otherwise, through 
a transcendental subreption, inevitably takes place, namely, 
the ascribing of objective reality to an idea that serves merely 
as a rule. 

In order properly to determine the meaning of this rule of 

1 [gcgeben.] 
2 [als im Objekte (den Erscheinungeri) an sich selbst gegeben.] 



ANTINOMY OF PURE REASON 451 

pure reason, we must observe, first, that it cannot tell us what 
the object is, but only how the empirical regress is to be carried 
out so as to arrive at the complete concept of the object. If it 
attempted the former task, it would be a constitutive principle, 
such as pure reason can never supply. It cannot be regarded 
as maintaining that the series of conditions for a given con- 
ditioned is in itself either finite or infinite. That would be to 
treat a mere idea of absolute totality, which is only produced 
in the idea, as equivalent to thinking an object that cannot be 
given in any experience. For in terms of it we should be as- 
cribing to a series of appearances an objective reality which 
is independent of empirical synthesis. This idea of reason can 
therefore do no more than prescribe a rule to the regressive 
synthesis in the series of conditions; and in accordance with 
this rule the synthesis must proceed from the conditioned, 
through all subordinate conditions, up to the unconditioned. 
Yet it can never reach this goal, for the absolutely un- 
conditioned is not to be met with in experience. 

We must therefore first of all determine what we are to 
mean by the synthesis of a series, in cases in which the syn- 
thesis is never complete. In this connection two expressions 
are commonly employed, which are intended to mark a dis- 
tinction, though without correctly assigning the ground of the 
distinction. Mathematicians speak solely of a progressus in 
infinitum. Philosophers, whose task it is to examine concepts, | B |" 
refuse to accept this expression as legitimate, substituting for 
it the phrase progressus in indefinitum. We need not stop to 
examine the reasons for such a distinction, or to enlarge upon 
its useful or useless employment. We need only determine 
these concepts with such accuracy as is required for our par- 
ticular purposes. 

Of a straight line we may rightly say that it can be pro- 
duced to infinity. In this case the distinction between an in- 
finite and an indeterminately great advance (progressus in in- 
definitum) would be mere subtlety. When we say, 'Draw a line', 
it sounds indeed more correct to add in indefinitum than in 
infinitum. Whereas the latter means that you must not cease 
producing it which is not what is intended the former means 
only, produce it as far as you please\ and if. we are referring 
only to what it is in our power to do, this expression is quite 



452 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

correct, for we can always make the line longer, without end. 
So is it in all cases in which we speak only of the progress, that 
is, of the advance from the condition to the conditioned: this 
possible advance proceeds, without end, in the series of ap- 
pearances. From a given pair of parents the descending line 
of generation may proceed without end, and we can quite 

B ^o) we ^ re &amp; ar d the line as actually so continuing in the world. 
For in this case reason never requires an absolute totality 
of the series, since it does not presuppose that totality as a 
condition and as given (datum), but only as something con- 
ditioned, that allows of being given (dabile), and is added to 
without end. 

Quite otherwise is it with the problem: how far the regress 
extends, when it ascends in a series from something given as 
conditioned to its conditions. Can we say that the regress is in 
infinitum^ or only that it is indeterminately far extended (in 
indefinitumfi Can we, for instance, ascend from the men now 
living, through the series of their ancestors, in infinitum] or 
can we only say that, so far as we have gone back, we have 
never met with an empirical ground for regarding the series as 
limited at any point, and that we are therefore justified and at 
the same time obliged, in the case of every ancestor, to search 
further for progenitors, though not indeed to presuppose them? 
We answer: when the whole is given in empirical intui- 
tion, the regress in the series of its inner conditions pro- 
ceeds in infinitum\ but when a member only of the series is 
given, starting from which the regress has to proceed to abso- 
lute totality, the regress is only of indeterminate character (in 

j* 54 1 1 indefinituni). Accordingly, the division of a body, that is, of a 
portion of matter given between certain limits, must be said to 
proceed in infinitum. For this matter is given as a whole, and 
therefore with all its possible parts, in empirical intuition. 
Since the condition of this whole is its part, and the condition 
of this part is the part of the part, and so on, and since in 
this regress of decomposition an unconditioned (indivisible) 
member of this series of conditions is never met with, not only 
is there never any empirical ground for stopping in the divi- 
sion, but the further members of any continued division are 
themselves empirically given prior to the continuation of the 
division The division, that is to say, goes on in infinitum. On 



ANTINOMY OF PURE REASON 453 

the other hand, since the series of ancestors of any given man 
is not given in its absolute totality in any possible experience, 
the regress proceeds from every member in the series of genera- 
tions to a higher member, and no empirical limit is encoun- 
tered which exhibits a member as absolutely unconditioned. 
And since the members, which might supply the condition, are 
not contained in an empirical intuition of the whole, prior to 
the regress, this regress does not proceed in infinitum, by divi- 
sion of the given, but only indefinitely far, searching for further 
members additional to those that are given, and which are 
themselves again always given as conditioned. 

In neither case, whether the regress be in infinitum or in | B |* 
indefinitum^ may the series of conditions be regarded as being 
given as infinite in the object. The series are not things in 
themselves, but only appearances, which, as conditions of one 
another, are given only in the regress itself. The question, 
therefore, is no longer how great this series of conditions may 
be in itself, whether it be finite or infinite, for it is nothing in 
itself; but how we are to carry out the empirical regress, and 
how far we should continue it. Here we find an important dis- 
tinction in regard to the rule governing such procedure. When 
the whole is empirically given, it impossible to proceed back in 
the series of its inner conditions in infinitum. When the whole 
is not given, but has first to be given through empirical regress, 
we can only say that the search for still higher conditions of the 
series impossible in infinitum. In the former case we could say: 
there are always more members, empirically given, than I can 
reach through the regress of decomposition; in the latter case, 
however, the position is this: we can always proceed still further 
in the regress, because no member is empirically given as abso- 
lutely unconditioned; and since a higher member is therefore 
always possible, the enquiry regarding it is necessary. In the 
one case we necessarily find further members of the series; in 
the other case, since no experience is absolutely limited, the ( g 5*5 
necessity is that we enquire for them. For either we have no 
perception which sets an absolute limit to the empirical re- 
gress, in which case we must not regard the regress as com- 
pleted, or we have a perception limiting our series, in which 
case the perception cannot be part of the* series traversed 
(for that which limits must be distinct from that which is 



454 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

thereby limited], and we must therefore continue our regress 
to this condition also, and the regress is thus again resumed. 

These observations will be set in their proper light by 
their application in the following section. 



THE ANTINOMY OF PURE REASON 
Section 9 

THE EMPIRICAL EMPLOYMENT OF THE REGULATIVE 
PRINCIPLE OF REASON, IN RESPECT OF ALL COSMO- 
LOGICAL IDEAS 

We have already, on several occasions, shown that no trans- 
cendental employment can be made of the pure concepts either 
of the understanding or of reason; that the [assertion of] abso- 
lute totality of the series of conditions in the sensible world 
rests on a transcendental employment of reason in which reason 
B 544} demands this unconditioned completeness from what it assumes 
to be a thing in itself; and that since the sensible world contains 
no such completeness, we are never justified in enquiring, as 
regards the absolute magnitude of the series in the sensible 
world, whether it be limited or in itself unlimited, but only 
how far we ought to go in the empirical regress, when we trace 
experience back to its conditions, obeying the rule of reason, 
and therefore resting content with no answer to its questions 
save that which is in conformity with the object. 

What therefore alone remains to us is the validity of the 
principle of reason as a rule for the continuation and magnitude 
of a possible experience; its invalidity as a constitutive prin- 
ciple of appearances [viewed as things] in themselves has been 
sufficiently demonstrated. If we can keep these conclusions 
steadily in view, the self-conflict of reason will be entirely at an 
end. For not only will this critical solution destroy the illusion 
which set reason at variance with itself, but will replace it by 
teaching which, in correcting the misinterpretation that has 
been the sole source of the conflict, brings reason into agree- 
ment with itself. A principle which otherwise would be dialec- 
tical 'will thus be 1 converted into a doctrinal principle. In fact, 
if this principle can be upheld as determining, in accordance 



ANTINOMY OF PURE REASON 455 

with its subjective significance, and yet also in conformity with 
the objects of experience, the greatest possible empirical use of 
understanding, the outcome will be much the same as if it 
were what is impossible from pure reason an axiom which | B ^ 
determined a priori the objects in themselves. For only in pro- 
portion as the principle is effective in directing the widest 
possible empirical employment of the understanding, can it 
exercise, in respect of the objects of experience, any influence 
in extending and correcting our knowledge. 

I 

Solution of the Cosmological Idea of the Totality of the 
Composition of the Appearances of a Cosmic Whole 

Here, as in the other cosmological questions, the regula- 
tive principle of reason is grounded on the proposition that in 
the empirical regress we can have no experience of an absolute 
limit) that is, no experience of any condition as being one 
that empirically is absolutely unconditioned. The reason is 
this: such an experience would have to contain a limitation 
of appearances by nothing, or by the void, and in the con- 
tinued regress we should have to be able to encounter this 
limitation in a perception which is impossible. 

This proposition, which virtually states that the only con- 
ditions which we can reach in the empirical regress are con- jg 5 1 ? 
ditions which must themselves again be regarded as empiric- 
ally conditioned, contains the rule in terminis, that however 
far we may have advanced in the ascending series, we must 
always enquire for a still higher member of the series, which 
may or may not become known to us through experience. 

For the solution, therefore, of the first cosmological prob- 
lem we have only to decide whether in the regress to the un- 
conditioned magnitude of the universe, in time and space, this 
never limited ascent can be called a regress to infinity, or only 
an indeterminately continued regress (in indefinitum). 

The quite general representation of the series of all past 
states of the world, as well as of all the things which coexist 
in cosmic space, is itself merely a possible empirical regress 
which I think to myself, though in an indeterminate manner. 
Only in this way can the concept of such a series of conditions 



456 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

for a given perception arise at all. a Now we have the cosmic 
B 547} w ^^ e on ty m concept, never, as a whole, in intuition. We 
cannot, therefore, argue from the magnitude of the cosmic 
whole to the magnitude of the regress, determining the 
latter in accordance with the former; on the contrary, only 
by reference to the magnitude of the empirical regress am I 
in a position to make for myself a concept of the magnitude of 
the world. But of this empirical regress the most that we can 
ever know is that from every given member of the series of 
conditions we have always still to advance empirically to a 
higher and more remote member. The magnitude of the 
whole of appearances is not thereby determined in any abso- 
lute manner; and we cannot therefore say that this regress 
proceeds to infinity. In doing so we should be anticipating 
members which the regress has not yet reached, represent- 
ing their number as so great that no empirical synthesis could 
attain thereto, and so should be determining the magnitude of 
the world (although only negatively) prior to the regress 
which is impossible. Since the world is not given me, in its 
totality, through any intuition, neither is its magnitude given 
me prior to the regress. We cannot, therefore, say anything 'at 
all in regard to the magnitude of the world, not even that there 
is in it a regress in infinitum. All that we can do is to seek 
for the concept of its magnitude according to the rule which 
determines the empirical regress in it. This rule says no more 
than that, however far we may have attained in the series of 
empirical conditions, we should never assume an absolute 
B u8 j ^ m ^i DU * should subordinate every appearance, as con- 
ditioned, to another as its condition, and that we must 
advance to this condition. This is the regressus in indefini- 
turn, which, as it determines no magnitude in the object, 
is clearly enough distinguishable from the regressus in infini- 
tum. 

a This cosmic series can, therefore, be neither greater nor smaller 
than the possible empirical regress upon which alone its concept 
rests. And since this regress can yield neither a determinate infinite 
nor a determinate finite (that is, anything absolutely limited), it is 
evident that the magnitude of the world can be taken neither as 
finite nor as infinite. The regress, through which it is represented, 
allows of neither alternative. 



ANTINOMY OF PURE REASON 457 

I cannot say, therefore, that the world is infinite in space 
or as regards past time. Any such concept of magnitude, as 
being that of a given infinitude, is empirically impossible, and 
therefore, in reference to the world as an object of the senses, 
also absolutely impossible. Nor can I say that the regress from 
a given perception to all that limits it in a series, whether in 
space or in past time, proceeds to infinity, that would be to 
presuppose that the world has infinite magnitude. I also can- 
not say that the regress is finite\ an absolute limit is likewise 
empirically impossible. Thus I can say nothing regarding the 
whole object of experience, the world of sense; I must limit 
my assertions to the rule which determines how experience, 
in conformity with its object, is to be obtained and further 
extended. 

Thus the first and negative answer to the cosmological 
problem regarding the magnitude of the world is that the 
world has no first beginning in time and no outermost limit 
in space. 

For if we suppose the opposite, the world would be limited 
on the one hand by empty time and on the other by empty | B 
space. Since, however, as appearance, it cannot in itself be 
limited in either manner appearance not being a thing in 
itself these limits of the world would have to be given in a 
possible experience, that is to say, we should require to have 
a perception of limitation by absolutely empty time or space. 
But such an experience, as completely empty of content, is 
impossible. Consequently, an absolute limit of the world is 
impossible empirically, and therefore also absolutely." 

The affirmative answer likewise directly follows, namely, 
that the regress in the series of appearances, as a determina- 
tion of the magnitude of the world, proceeds in indefinitum. 

a It may be noted that this proof is presented in a very different 
manner from the dogmatic proof of the antithesis of the first 
antinomy. In that argument we regarded the sensible world, in 
accordance with the common and dogmatic view, as a thing given 
in itself, in its totality, prior to any regress; and we asserted that 
unless it occupies all time and all places, it cannot have any deter- 
minate position whatsoever in them. The conclusion also was there- 
fore different from that given above; for in the dogmatic proof we 
inferred the actual infinity of the world. 



458 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

This is equivalent to saying that, although the sensible world 
has no absolute magnitude, the empirical regress (through 
which alone it can be given on the side of its conditions) has 
its own rule, namely, that it must always advance from every 
member of the series, as conditioned, to one still more remote; 
doing so by means either of our own experience, or of the 
B 550} guiding-thread of history, or of the chain of effects and causes. 
And as the rule further demands, our sole and constant aim 
must be the extension of the possible empirical employment 
of the understanding, this being the only proper task of reason 
in the application of its principles. 

This rule does not prescribe a determinate empirical regress 
that must proceed without end in some one kind of appearance, 
e.g. that in proceeding from a living person through a series 
of progenitors we must never expect to meet with a first pair, 
or that in the series of cosmic bodies we must never admit an 
outermost sun. All that the rule requires is that the advance 
from appearances be to appearances; for even if these latter 
yield no actual perception (as is the case when for our con- 
sciousness they are too weak in degree to become experience), 
as appearances they none the less still belong to a possible 
experience. 

All beginning is in time and all limits of the extended are 
in space. But space and time belong only to the world of sense. 
Accordingly, while appearances in the world are conditionally 
limited, the world itself is neither conditionally nor uncon- 
ditionally limited. 

Similarly, since the world can never be given as complete, 
and since even the series of conditions for that which is given 
as conditioned cannot, as a cosmic series, be given as complete, 
the concept of the magnitude of the world is given only through 
g 5 2 3 j the regress and not in a collective intuition prior to it. But the 
regress consists only in the determining of the magnitude, and 
does not give any determinate concept. It does not, therefore, 
yield any concept of a magnitude which, in relation to a certain 
[unit-] measure, can be described as infinite. In other words, 
the regress does not proceed to the infinite, as if the infinite 
could be given, but only indeterminately far, in order [by 
means of the regress] to give that empirical magnitude which 
first becomes actual in and through this very regress. 



ANTINOMY OF PURE REASON 459 



II 

Solution of the Cosmological Idea of the Totality of 
Division of a Whole given in Intuition 

If we divide a whole which is given in intuition, we pro- 
ceed from something conditioned to the conditions of its pos- 
sibility. The division of the parts (subdivisio or decompositio) 
is a regress in the series of these conditions. The absolute 
totality of this series would be given only if the regress could 
reach simple parts. But if all the parts in a continuously pro- 
gressing decomposition are themselves again divisible, the 
division, that is, the regress from the conditioned to its con- 
ditions, proceeds in infinitum. For the conditions (the parts) 
are themselves contained in the conditioned, and since this 
is given complete in an intuition that is enclosed between |g 
limits, the parts are one and all given together with the con- 
ditioned. The regress may not, therefore, be entitled merely 
a regress in indefinitum. This was permissible in regard to the 
first cosmological idea, since it required an advance from the 
conditioned to its conditions, which, as outside it, were not given 
through and along with it, but were first added to it in the em- 
pirical regress. We are not, however, entitled to say of a whole 
which is divisible to infinity, that it is made up of infinitely 
many parts. For although all parts are contained in the intuition 
of the whole, the whole division is not so contained, but consists 
only in the continuous decomposition, that is, in the regress 
itself, whereby the series first becomes actual. Since this regress 
is infinite, all the members or parts at which it arrives are 
contained in the given whole, viewed as an aggregate. But the 
whole series of the division is not so contained, for it is a 
successive infinite and never whole, and cannot, therefore, 
exhibit an infinite multiplicity, or any combination of an 
infinite multiplicity in a whole. 

This general statement is obviously applicable to space. 
Every space intuited as within limits is such a whole, the parts 
of which, as obtained by decomposition, are always themselves 
spaces. Every limited space is therefore infinitely divisible. 

From this a second application of the. statement quite 
naturally follows, namely, to an outer appearance enclosed 



460 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

within limits, that is, to body. Its divisibility is grounded in 
the divisibility of space, which constitutes the possibility of the 
body as an extended whole. Body is therefore infinitely divis- 
ible, without consisting, however, of infinitely many parts. 

It may seem, indeed, that a body, since it has to be repre- 
sented in space as substance, will, as regards the law of the 
divisibility of space, differ from space. We may certainly grant 
that decomposition can never remove all compositeness from 
space; for that would mean that space, in which there is 
nothing self-subsistent, had ceased to be space, which is impos- 
sible. On the other hand, the assertion that if all compositeness 
of matter be thought away nothing at all will remain, does not 
appear to be compatible with the concept of a substance which 
is meant to be the subject of all compositeness, and which 
must persist in the elements of the composite, even although 
the connection in space, whereby they constitute a body, be 
removed. But while this is true of a thing in itself, as thought 
through a pure concept of the understanding, it does not hold 
of that which we entitle substance in the [field of] appearance. 
For this latter is not an absolute subject, but only an abiding 
g j&gt;26\ image 1 of sensibility; it is nothing at all save as an intuition, 
in which unconditionedness is never to be met with. 

But although this rule of progress ininfinitum undoubtedly 
applies to the subdivision of an appearance, viewed as a mere 
filling of space, it cannot be made to apply to a whole in which 
already, as given, the parts are so definitely distinguished off 
from one another that they constitute a quantum discretum. 
We cannot assume that every part of an organised whole is 
itself again so organised that, in the analysis of the parts to 
infinity, still other organised parts 2 are always to be met with; 
in a word, that the whole is organised to infinity. This is not a 
thinkable hypothesis. It is true, indeed, that the parts of matter, 
[as found] in their decomposition in infinitum^ may be organ- 
ised. The infinitude of the division of a given appearance in 
space is grounded solely on the fact that, through this infini- 
tude, only the divisibility (in itself, as regards the number of its 
parts, absolutely indeterminate) is given the parts themselves 
being given and determined only through the subdivision. In 
a word, the whcJe is not in itself already divided. The number 

1 \beharrliches Bild.] [Kunstteile.] 



ANTINOMY OF PURE REASON 461 

of parts, therefore, which a division may determine in a whole, 
will depend upon how far we care to advance in the regress of 
the division. On the other hand, in the case of an organic body JA 527 
conceived as organised in infinitum the whole is represented \ B 555 
as already divided into parts, and as yielding to us, prior to all 
regress, a determinate and yet infinite number of parts. This, 
however, is self-contradictory. This infinite involution is re- 
garded as an infinite (that is, never to be completed) series, 
and yet at the same time as completed in a [discrete] com- 
plex. 1 Infinite divisibility belongs to appearance only in so 
far as it is a quantum continuum] it is inseparable from the 
occupation of space, which is indeed its ground. To view any- 
thing as being a quantum discretum, is to take the number of 
units in it as being determined, and therefore as being in every 
case equal to some number. How far organisation can go in an 
organised body, only experience can show; and although, so 
far as our experience has gone, we may not have arrived with 
certainty at any inorganic part, the possibility of experiencing 
such parts must at least be recognised. When, however, we 
have in mind the transcendental division of an appearance 
in general, the question how far it may extend does not await 
an answer from experience; it is decided by a principle of 
reason which prescribes that, in the decomposition of the ex- 
tended, the empirical regress, in conformity with the nature of 
this appearance, be never regarded as absolutely completed. 

Concluding Note on the Solution of the Mathematical-trans- |g 5 2 ^ 
cendental Ideas, and Preliminary Observation on the Solution of 
the Dynamical-transcendental Ideas. 

In representing the antinomy of pure reason, through all 
the transcendental ideas, in tabular form, and in showing that 
the ground of this conflict and the only means of removing it 
is by declaring both the opposed assertions to be false, we have 
represented the conditions as, in all cases, standing to the con- 
ditioned in relations of space and time. This is the assumption 
ordinarily made by the common understanding, and to it the 
conflict is exclusively due. On this view all the dialectical 
representations of totality, in the series of conditions for a 
given conditioned, are throughout of the same character. The 

1 \Zusammennehmung] 



462 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

condition is always a member of a series along with the con- 
ditioned, and so is homogeneous with it. In such a series 
the regress was never thought as completed, or if it had to be 
so thought, a member, in itself conditioned, must have been 
falsely supposed to be a first member, and therefore to be 
unconditioned; the object, that is, the conditioned, might not 
always be considered merely according to its magnitude, but at 

g 557) least the series of its conditions was so regarded. Thus arose the 
difficulty a difficulty which could not be disposed of by any 
compromise but solely by cutting the knot that reason made 
the series either too long or too short for the understanding, so 
that the understanding could never be equal to the prescribed 
idea. 

But in all this we have been overlooking an essential dis- 
tinction that obtains among the objects, that is, among those 
concepts of understanding which reason endeavours to raise 
to ideas. According to the table of categories given above, two 
of these concepts imply a mathematical, the other two a 
dynamical synthesis of appearances. Hitherto it has not been 
necessary to take account of this distinction; for just as in the 
general representation of all transcendental ideas we have 
been conforming to conditions within the [field of] appearance, 
so in the two mathematical-transcendental ideas the only 
object we have had in mind is object as appearance. But now 
that we are proceeding to consider how far dynamical con- 
cepts of the understanding are adequate to the idea of reason, 
the distinction becomes of importance, and opens up to us an 
entirely new view of the suit in which reason is implicated. 
This suit, in our previous trial of it, has been dismissed as 
resting, on both sides, on false presuppositions. But since in 

B 558 / * ne dynamical antinomy a presupposition compatible with the 
pretensions of reason may perhaps be found, and since the 
judge may perhaps make good what is lacking in the pleas 
which both sides have been guilty of misstating, the suit may 
be settled to the satisfaction of both parties, a procedure im- 
possible in the case of the mathematical antinomies. 

If we consider solely the extension^- of the series of condi- 
tions, and whether the series are adequate to the idea, or the 
idea too large or,too small for the series, the series are indeed in 
1 [Erstreckung.] 



ANTINOMY OF PURE REASON 463 

these respects all homogeneous. But the concept of the under- 
standing, which underlies these ideas, may contain either a 
synthesis solely of the homogeneous (which is presupposed 
alike in the composition and in the division of every magni- 
tude), or a synthesis of the heterogeneous. For the hetero- 
geneous can be admitted as at least possible in the case of 
dynamical synthesis, alike in causal connection and in the 
connection of the necessary with the contingent. 

Hence in the mathematical connection of the series of 
appearances no other than a sensible condition is admissible, 
that is to say, none that is not itself a part of the series. On the 
other hand, in the dynamical series of sensible conditions, a 
heterogeneous condition, not itself a part of the series, but 
purely intelligible, and as such outside the series, can be 
allowed. In this way reason obtains satisfaction and the {B 559 
unconditioned is set prior to the appearances, while yet the 
invariably conditioned character of the appearances is not 
obscured, nor their series cut short, in violation of the 
principles prescribed by the understanding. 

Inasmuch as the dynamical ideas allow of a condition of 
appearances outside the series of the appearances, that is, a 
condition which is not itself appearance, we arrive at a con- 
clusion altogether different from any that was possible in the 
case of the mathematical antinomy. 1 In it we were obliged 
to denounce both the opposed dialectical assertions as false. 
In the dynamical series, on the other hand, the completely 
conditioned, which is inseparable from the series considered 
as appearances, is bound up with a condition which, while 
indeed empirically unconditioned, is also non-sensible. We 
are thus able to obtain satisfaction for understanding on 
the one hand and for reason on the other." The dialectical 

Understanding does not admit among appearances any condi- 
tion which can itself be empirically unconditioned. But if for some 
conditioned in the [field of] appearance we can conceive an intellig- 
ible condition, not belonging to the series of appearances as one of 
its members, and can do so without in the least interrupting the 
series of empirical conditions, such a condition may be accepted as 
empirically unconditioned ', without prejudice to the continuity of the 
empirical regress. 

1 [Reading, with Hartenstein, der mathematischen Jfhtinomie for der Anti- 
nomic.} 



464 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

arguments, which in one or other way sought unconditioned 
B 560} t tan ty m mere appearances, fall to the ground, and the pro- 
positions of reason, when thus given this more correct inter- 
pretation, may both alike be true. This can never be the case 
with those cosmological ideas which refer only to a mathe- 
matically unconditioned unity; for in them no condition of the 
series of appearances can be found that is not itself appear- 
ance, and as appearance one of the members of the series. 

Ill 

Solution of the Cosmological Idea 1 of Totality in the 
Derivation of Cosmical Events from their Causes 

When we are dealing with what happens there are only two 
kinds of causality conceivable by us; the causality is either 
according to nature or arises from freedom. The former is 
the connection in the sensible world of one state with a pre- 
ceding state on which it follows according to a rule. Since the 
causality of appearances rests on conditions of time, and the 
preceding state, if it had always existed, could not have pro- 
duced an effect which first comes into being in time, it follows 
that the causality of the cause of that which happens or comes 
into being must itself also have come into being, and that in 
accordance with the principle of the understanding it must 
in its turn itself require a cause. 

B 561} ^ v f ree dom, on the other hand, in its cosmological mean- 
ing, I understand the power of beginning a state spontane- 
ously? Such causality will not, therefore, itself stand under 
another cause determining it in time, as required by the law of 
nature. Freedom, in this sense, is a pure transcendental idea, 
which, in the first place, contains nothing borrowed from ex- 
perience, and which, secondly, refers to an object that cannot 
be determined or given in any experience. That everything 
which happens has a cause is a universal law, conditioning the 
very possibility of all experience. Hence the causality of the 
cause, which itself happens or comes to be, must itself in turn 
have a cause; and thus the entire field of experience, however 
far it may extend, is transformed into a sum-total of the 
merely natural. ,But since in this way no absolute totality of 

1 [Reading, with Erdmann, Idee for Ideen.} 2 [von selbst.} 



ANTINOMY OF PURE REASON 465 

conditions determining causal relation can be obtained, reason 
creates for itself the idea of a spontaneity which can begin to 
act of itself, without requiring to be determined to action by 
an antecedent cause in accordance with the law of causality 

It should especially be noted that the practical concept of 
freedom is based on this transcendental idea, and that in the 
latter lies the real source of the difficulty by which the ques- 
tion of the possibility of freedom has always been beset. 
Freedom in the practical sense is the will's 1 independence of I g p* 
coercion through sensuous impulses. For a will is sensuous, in 
so far as it is pathologically affected^ i.e. by sensuous motives; 2 
it is animal (arbitrium brutum), if it can be pathologically 
necessitated. The human will is certainly an arbitrium sensi- 
tivum, not, however, brutum but liberum. For sensibility does 
not necessitate its action. There is in man a power of self- 
determination, independently of any coercion through sensuous 
impulses. 

Obviously, if all causality in the sensible world were mere 
nature, every event would be determined by another in time, 
in accordance with necessary laws. Appearances, in determin- 
ing the will, would have in the actions of the will their natural 
effects, and would render the actions necessary. The denial of 
transcendental freedom must, therefore, involve the elimina- 
tion of all practical freedom. For practical freedom presup- 
poses that although something has not happened, it ought to 
have happened, and that its cause, [as found] in the [field of] 
appearance, is not, therefore, so determining that it excludes a 
causality of our will a causality which, independently of those 
natural causes, and even contrary to their force and influence, 
can produce something that is determined in the time-order 
in accordance with empirical laws, and which can therefore 
begin a series of events entirely of itself. 

Here then, as always happens when reason, in venturing M 535 
beyond the limits of possible experience, comes into conflict 
with itself, the problem is not really physiological but trans- 
cendental. The question as to the possibility of freedom 
does indeed concern psychology; since it rests on dialectical 
arguments of pure reason, its treatment and solution belong 
exclusively to transcendental philosophy. Before attempting 
1 [Willkur.] {Bewegursachen^ 

2H 



466 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

this solution, a task which transcendental philosophy cannot 
decline, I must define somewhat more accurately the procedure 
of transcendental philosophy in dealing with the problem. 

If appearances were things in themselves, and space and 
time forms of the existence of things in themselves, the condi- 
tions would always be members of the same series as the con- 
ditioned; and thus, in the present case, as in the other transcen- 
dental ideas, the antinomy would arise, that the series must be 
too large or too small for the understanding. But the dynami- 
cal concepts of reason, with which we have to deal in this and 
the following section, possess this peculiarity that they are not 
concerned with an object considered as a magnitude, but only 
with its existence. Accordingly we can abstract from the mag- 
nitude of the series of conditions, and consider only the dynami- 

B 564} ca l relation of the condition to the conditioned. The difficulty 
which then meets us, in dealing with the question regarding 
nature and freedom, is whether freedom is possible at all, and 
if it be possible, whether it can exist along with the universality 
of the natural law of causality. Is it a truly disjunctive propo- 
sition to say that every effect in the world must arise either 
from nature or from freedom; or must we not rather say that 
in one and the same event, in different relations, both can be 
found? That all events in the sensible world stand in thorough- 
going connection in accordance with unchangeable laws of 
nature is an established principle of the Transcendental Ana- 
lytic, and allows of no exception. The question, therefore, can 
only be whether freedom is completely excluded by this inviol- 
able rule, or whether an effect, notwithstanding its being thus 
determined in accordance with nature, may not at the same 
time be grounded in freedom. The common but fallacious pre- 
supposition of the absolute reality of appearances here mani- 
fests its injurious influence, to the confounding of reason. For 
if appearances are things in themselves, freedom cannot be up- 
held. Nature will then be the complete and sufficient deter- 
mining cause of every event. The condition of the event will be 
such as can be found only in the series of appearances; both it 
and its effect will be necessary in accordance with the law of 

B ^ f nature. If, on the other hand, appearances are not taken for 
more than they actually are; if they are viewed not as things in 
themselves, but merely as representations, connected accord- 



ANTINOMY OF PURE REASON 467 

ing to empirical laws, they must themselves have grounds 
which are not appearances. The effects of such an intelligible 
cause appear, and accordingly can be determined through 
other appearances, but its causality is not so determined. 
While the effects are to be found in the series of empirical con- 
ditions, the intelligible cause, together with its causality, is 
outside the series. Thus the effect may be regarded as free in 
respect of its intelligible cause, and at the same time in respect 
of appearances as resulting from them according to the neces- 
sity of nature. This distinction, when stated in this quite general 
and abstract manner, is bound to appear extremely subtle and 
obscure, but will become clear in the course of its application. 
My purpose has only been to point out that since the thorough- 
going connection of all appearances, in a context of nature, is 
an inexorable law, the inevitable consequence of obstinately 
insisting upon the reality of appearances is to destroy all 
freedom. Those who thus follow the common view have never 
been able to reconcile nature and freedom. 

Possibility of Causality through Freedom, in Harmony with the j 538 
Universal Law of Natural Necessity. 

Whatever in an object of the senses is not itself appearance, 
I entitle intelligible. If, therefore, that which in the sensible 
world must be regarded as appearance has in itself a faculty 
which is not an object of sensible intuition, but through which 
it can be the cause of appearances, the causality of this being 
can be regarded from two points of view. Regarded as the 
causality of a thing in itself, it is intelligible in its action] re- 
garded as the causality of an appearance in the world of sense, 
it is sensible in its effects. We should therefore have to form both 
an empirical and an intellectual concept of the causality of the 
faculty of such a subject, and to regard both as referring to one 
and the same effect. This twofold manner of conceiving the 
faculty possessed by an object of the senses does not contradict 
any of the concepts which we have to form of appearances and 
of a possible experience. For since they are not things in them- 
selves, they must rest upon a transcendental object which deter- 
mines them as mere representations; and con^quently there is 
nothing to prevent us from ascribing to this transcendental | B ^ 



468 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

object, besides the quality in terms of which 1 it appears, a 
causality which is not appearance, although its effect is to be 
met with in appearance. Every efficient cause must have a 
character* that is, a law of its causality, without which it 
would not be a cause. On the above supposition, we should, 
therefore, in a subject belonging to the sensible world have, 
first, an empirical character, whereby its actions, as appear- 
ances, stand in thoroughgoing connection with other appear- 
ances in accordance with unvarying laws of nature. And since 
these actions can be derived from the other appearances, they 
constitute together with them a single series in the order of 
nature. Secondly, we should also have to allow the subject an 
intelligible character, by which it is indeed the cause of those 
same actions [in their quality] as appearances, but which does 
not itself stand under any conditions of sensibility, and is not 
itself appearance. We can entitle the former the character of 
the thing in the [field of] appearance, and the latter its char- 
acter as thing in itself. 

Now this acting subject would not, in its intelligible 
character, stand under any conditions of time; time is only a 
condition of appearances, not of things in themselves. In this 
subject no action would begin or cease, and it would not, there- 
B 568) f re &gt; have to conform to the law of the determination of all that 
is alterable in time, namely, that everything which happens 
must have its cause in the appearances which precede it. In 
a word, its causality, so far as it is intelligible, 3 would not have 
a place in the series of those empirical conditions through 
which the event is rendered necessary in the world of sense. 
This intelligible character can never, indeed, be immediately 
known, for nothing can be perceived except in so far as it 
appears. It would have to be thought in accordance with the 
empirical character just as we are constrained to think a 
transcendental object as underlying appearances, though we 
know nothing of what it is in itself. 

In its empirical character, therefore, this subject, as ap- 
pearance, would have to conform to all the laws of causal 
determination. To this extent it could be nothing more than 
a part of the world of sense, and its effects, like all other 



k.] a [Charakter.] 

3 \intellektuell. In all other cases Kant employs the less misleading term 
intelligibel.} 



ANTINOMY OF PURE REASON 469 

appearances, must be the inevitable outcome of nature. In 
proportion as outer appearances are found to influence it, and 
in proportion as its empirical character, that is, the law of its 
causality, becomes known through experience, all its actions 
must admit of explanation in accordance with the laws of 
nature. In other words, all that is required for their complete 
and necessary determination must be found in a possible 
experience. 

In its intelligible character (though we can only have a |g $69 
general concept of that character) this same subject must be 
considered to be free from all influence of sensibility and from 
all determination through appearances. Inasmuch as it is 
noumenon, nothing happens in it; there can be no change 
requiring dynamical determination in time, and therefore no 
causal dependence upon appearances. And consequently, 
since natural necessity is to be met with only in the sensible 
world, this active being must in its actions be independent 
of, and free from all such necessity. No action begins in this 
active being itself; but we may yet quite correctly say that the 
active being of itself begins its effects in the sensible world. In 
so doing, we should not be asserting that the effects in the 
sensible world can begin of themselves; they are always prede- 
termined through antecedent empirical conditions, though 
solely through their empirical character (which is no more 
than the appearance of the intelligible), and so are only pos- 
sible as a continuation of the series of natural causes. In this 
way freedom and nature, in the full sense of these terms, can 
exist together, without any conflict, in the same actions, accord- 
ing as the actions are referred to their intelligible or to their 
sensible cause. 

Explanation of the Cosmological Idea of Freedom in its con- |g |y 
nection with Universal Natural Necessity. 

I have thought it advisable to give this outline sketch of 
the solution of our transcendental problem, so that we may 
be the better enabled to survey the course which reason has 
to adopt in arriving at the solution. I shall now proceed to set 
forth the various factors involved in this solution, and to con- 
sider each in detail. 

That everything which happens has a cuse, is a law of 
nature. Since the causality of this cause, that is, the action of 



470 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

the cause, is antecedent in time to the effect which has ensued 
upon it, it cannot itself have always existed, but must have 
happened, and among the appearances must have a cause by 
which it in turn is determined. Consequently, all events are 
empirically determined in an order of nature. Only in virtue 
of this law can appearances constitute a nature and become 
objects of experience. This law is a law of the understanding, 
from which no departure can be permitted, and from which 
no appearance may be exempted. To allow such exemption 
would be to set an appearance outside all possible experience, 

B ^j I to distinguish it from all objects of possible experience, and so 
to make of it a mere thought-entity, a phantom of the brain. 
This would seem to imply the existence of a chain of causes 
which in the regress to their conditions allows of no absolute tot- 
ality. But that need not trouble us. The point has already been 
dealt with in the general discussion of the antinomy into which 
reason falls when in the series of appearances it proceeds to the 
unconditioned. Were we to yield to the illusion of transcendental 
realism, neither nature nor freedom would remain. The only 
question here is this: Admitting that in the whole series of 
events there is nothing but natural necessity, is it yet possible 
to regard one and the same event as being in one aspect merely 
an effect of nature and in another aspect an effect due to free- 
dom; or is there between these two kinds of causality a direct 
contradiction? 

Among the causes in the [field of] appearance there cer- 
tainly cannot be anything which could begin a series abso- 
lutely and of itself. Every action, [viewed] as appearance, in so 
far as it gives rise to an event, is itself an event or happening, 
and presupposes another state wherein its cause is to be found. 
Thus everything which happens is merely a continuation of 
the series, and nothing that begins of itself is a possible mem- 

B 572} k er f tne series. The actions of natural causes in the time- 
sequence are thus themselves effects; they presuppose causes 
antecedent to them in the temporal series. An original act, 
such as can by itself bring about what did not exist before, is 
not to be looked for in the causally connected appearances. 

Now granting that effects are appearances and that their 
cause is likewise^appearance, is it necessary that the causality 
of their cause should be exclusively empirical? May it not 



ANTINOMY OP PURE REASON 471 

rather be, that while for every effect in the [field of] appear- 
ance a connection with its cause in accordance with the 
laws of empirical causality is indeed required, this empirical 
causality, without the least violation of its connection with 
natural causes, is itself an effect of a causality that is not 
empirical but intelligible ? This latter causality would be the 
action of a cause which, in respect of appearances, is original, 
and therefore, as pertaining to this faculty, not appearance but 
intelligible; although it must otherwise, in so far as it is a link 
in the chain of nature, be regarded as entirely belonging to 
the world of sense. 

The principle of the causal connection of appearances is 
required in order that we may be able to look for and to 
determine the natural conditions of natural events, that is to 
say, their causes in the [field of] appearance. If this principle 
be admitted, and be not weakened through any exception, 
the requirements of the understanding, which in its empirical 
employment sees in all happenings nothing but nature, and is | B 
justified in so doing, are completely satisfied; and physical ex- 
planations may proceed on their own lines without interference. 
These requirements are not in any way infringed, if we assume, 
even though the assumption should be a mere fiction, that some 
among the natural causes have a faculty which is intelligible 
only, inasmuch as its determination to action never rests upon 
empirical conditions, but solely on grounds of understanding. 
We must, of course, at the same time be able to assume that 
the action of these causes in the [field of] appearance is in con- 
formity with all the laws of empirical causality. In this way 
the acting subject, as causa phaenomenon^ would be bound up 
with nature through the indissoluble dependence of all its 
actions, and only as we ascend from the empirical object to 
the transcendental should we find that this subject, together 
with all its causality in the [field of] appearance, has in its 
noumenon 1 certain conditions which must be regarded as 
purely intelligible. For if in determining in what ways appear- 
ances can serve as causes we follow the rules of nature, we 
need not concern ourselves what kind of ground for these 
appearances and their connection may have to be thought as 
existing in the transcendental subject, whick is empirically 

1 [Reading, with Hartenstein, noumenon for phenomenon.] 



472 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

unknown to us. This intelligible ground does not have to be 
considered in empirical enquiries; it concerns only thought 

B 574 j in the pure understanding; and although the effects of this 
thought and action of the pure understanding are to be met 
with in the appearances, these appearances must none the less 
be capable of complete causal explanation in terms of other 
appearances in accordance with natural laws. We have to take 
their strictly empirical character as the supreme ground of 
explanation, leaving entirely out of account their intelligible 
character (that is, the transcendental cause of their empirical 
character) as being completely unknown, save in so far as the 
empirical serves for its sensible sign. 

Let us apply this to experience. Man is one of the appear- 
ances of the sensible world, and in so far one of the natural 
causes the causality of which must stand under empirical 
laws. Like all other things in nature, he must have an em- 
pirical character. This character we come to know through 
the powers and faculties which he reveals in his actions. 1 In 
lifeless, or merely animal, nature we find no ground for 
thinking that any faculty is conditioned otherwise than in a 
merely sensible manner. Man, however, who knows all 'the 
rest of nature solely through the senses, knows himself also 
through pure 2 apperception; and this, indeed, in acts and inner 
determinations which he cannot regard as impressions of the 
senses. He is thus to himself, on the one hand phenomenon, 
and on the other hand, in respect of certain faculties the 

B 575} action of which cannot be ascribed to the receptivity of 
sensibility, a purely 3 intelligible object. We entitle these 
faculties understanding and reason. The latter, in particular, 
we distinguish in a quite peculiar and especial way from all 
empirically conditioned powers. For it views its objects ex- 
clusively 3 in the light of ideas, and in accordance with them 
determines the understanding, which then proceeds to make 
an empirical use of its own similarly pure concepts. 

That our reason has causality, or that we at least represent 
it to ourselves as having causality, is evident from the impera- 
tives which in all matters of conduct we impose as rules upon 
our active powers. 'Ought' expresses a kind of necessity and of 
connection with grounds which is found nowhere else in the 

1 [Wirkungen.] [blosse.] [bloss.] 



ANTINOMY OF PURE REASON 473 

whole of nature. The understanding can know in nature only 
what is, what has been, or what will be. We cannot say that 
anything in nature ought to be other than what in all these 
time-relations it actually is. When we have the course of 
nature alone in view, l ough? has no meaning whatsoever. It 
is just as absurd to ask what ought to happen in the natural 
world as to ask what properties a circle ought to have. All 
that we are justified in asking is: what happens in nature? 
what are the properties of the circle? 

This 'ought' expresses a possible action the ground of 
which cannot be anything but a mere concept; whereas in the 
case of a merely natural action the ground must always be an |g |^ 
appearance. The action to which the 'ought' applies must in- 
deed be possible under natural conditions. These conditions, 
however, do not play any part in determining the will itself, 
but only in determining the effect and its consequences in the 
[field of] appearance. No matter how many natural grounds 
or how many sensuous impulses may impel me to will, they 
can never give rise to the 'ought', but only to a willing which, 
while very far from being necessary, is always conditioned; and 
the 'ought' pronounced by reason confronts such willing with a 
limit and an end nay more, forbids or authorises it. Whether 
what is willed be an object of mere sensibility (the pleasant) or 
of pure reason (the good), reason will not give way to any ground 
which is empirically given. Reason does not here follow the 
order of things as they present themselves in appearance, but 
frames to itself with perfect spontaneity an order of its own ac- 
cording to ideas, to which it adapts the empirical conditions, 
and according to which it declares actions to be necessary, 
even although they have never taken place, and perhaps never 
will take place. And at the same time reason also presupposes 
that it can have causality in regard to all these actions, since 
otherwise no empirical effects could be expected from its ideas. 

Now, in view of these considerations, let us take our 
stand, and regard it as at least possible for reason to have 
causality with respect to appearances. Reason though it be, f g ^49 
it must none the less exhibit an empirical character. For every 
cause presupposes a rule according to which certain appear- 
ances follow as effects; and every rule requires uniformity in 
the effects. This uniformity is, indeed, that upon which the 



474 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

concept of cause (as a faculty) is based, and so far as it must 
be exhibited by mere appearances may be named the em- 
pirical character of the cause. This character is permanent, 
but its effects, according to variation in the concomitant and 
in part limiting conditions, appear in changeable forms. 

Thus the will of every man has an empirical character, 
which is nothing but a certain causality of his reason, so far as 
that causality exhibits, in its effects in the [field of] appearance, 
a rule from which we may gather what, in their kind and de- 
grees, are the actions of reason and the grounds thereof, and so 
may form an estimate concerning the subjective principles of 
his will. Since this empirical character must itself be dis- 
covered from the appearances which are its effect and from 
the rule to which experience shows them to conform, it 
follows that all the actions of men in the [field of] appear- 
ance are determined in conformity with the order of nature, 
by their empirical character and by the other causes which co- 
B t^s) P era ^ e with that character; and if we could exhaustively in- 
vestigate all the appearances of men's wills, there would not 
be found a single human action which we could not predict 
with certainty, and recognise as proceeding necessarily from 
its antecedent conditions. So far, then, as regards this em- 
pirical character there is no freedom; and yet it is only in the 
light of this character that man can be studied if, that is to 
say, we are simply observing, and in the manner of anthro- 
pology seeking to institute a physiological investigation into 
the motive causes of his actions. 

But when we consider these actions in their relation to 
reason I do not mean speculative reason, by which we en- 
deavour to explain their coming into being, but reason in so 
far as it is itself the cause producing them if, that is to say, 
we compare them with [the standards of] reason in impractical 
bearing, we find a rule and order altogether different from the 
order of nature. For it may be that all that has happened in the 
course of nature, and in accordance with its empirical grounds 
must inevitably have happened, ought not to have happened. 
Sometimes, however, we find, or at least believe that we find, 
that the ideas of reason have in actual fact proved their caus- 
ality in respect of the actions of men, as appearances; and 
that these actions have taken place, not because they were 



ANTINOMY OF PURE REASON 475 



determined by empirical causes, but because they were deter- 
mined by grounds of reason. 

Granted, then, that reason may be asserted to have caus- | B 
ality in respect of appearance, its action can still be said to 
be free, even although its empirical character (as a mode of 
sense 1 ) is completely and necessarily determined in all its 
detail. This empirical character is itself determined in the in- 
telligible character (as a mode of thought 2 ). The latter, how- 
ever, we do not know; we can only indicate its nature by 
means of appearances; and these really yield an immediate 
knowledge only of the mode of sense, the empirical char- 
acter. The action, in so far as it can be ascribed to a mode 
of thought as its cause, does not follow therefrom in accord- 
ance with empirical laws; that is to say, it is not preceded 
by the conditions of pure reason, but only by their effects in 
the [field of] appearance of inner sense. Pure reason, as a 
purely intelligible faculty, is not subject to the form of time, 
nor consequently to the conditions of succession in time. The 
causality of reason in its intelligible character does not, in pro- 
ducing an effect, arise or begin to be at a certain time. For in | B 
that case it would itself be subject to the natural law of appear- 
ances, in accordance with which causal series are determined 
in time; and its causality would then be nature, not freedom. 
Thus all that we are justified in saying is that, if reason can 
have causality in respect of appearances, it is a faculty through 
which the sensible condition of an empirical series of effects 
first begins. For the condition which lies in reason is not 
sensible, and therefore does not itself begin to be. And thus 
what we failed to find in any empirical series is disclosed as 
being possible, namely, that the condition of a successive 
series of events may itself be empirically unconditioned. For 

The real morality of actions, their merit or guilt, even that of 
our own conduct, thus remains entirely hidden from us. Our im- 
putations can refer only to the empirical character. How much of 
this character is ascribable to the pure effect of freedom, how much 
to mere nature, that is, to faults of temperament for which there is 
no responsibility, or to its happy constitution (meritofortunae), can 
never be determined; and upon it therefore no perfectly just judg- 
ments can be passed. 



1 [Sinnesart.] 2 [Denkungsart.] 



476 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

here the condition is outside the series of appearances (in the 
intelligible), and therefore is not subject to any sensible con- 
dition, and to no time-determination through an antecedent 
cause. 

The same cause does, indeed, in another relation, belong 
to the series of appearances. Man is himself an appearance. 
His will has an empirical character, which is the empirical 
cause of all his actions. There is no condition determining 
man in accordance with this character which is not contained 
in the series of natural effects, or which is not subject to their 
law the law according to which there can be no empirically 
unconditioned causality of that which happens in time. There- 
is 581) fore no given action (since it can be perceived only as appear- 
ance) can begin absolutely of itself. But of pure reason we 
cannot say that the state wherein the will is determined is 
preceded and itself determined by some other state. For since 
reason is not itself an appearance, and is not subject to any 
conditions of sensibility, it follows that even as regards its 
causality there is in it no time-sequence, and that the dyna- 
mical law of nature, which determines succession in time in 
accordance with rules, is not applicable to it. 

Reason is the abiding condition of all those actions of the 
will under [the guise of] which man appears. Before ever they 
have happened, they are one and all predetermined in the 
empirical character. In respect of the intelligible character, of 
which the empirical character is the sensible schema, there can 
be no before and after] every action, irrespective of its relation 
in time to other appearances, is the immediate effect of the 
intelligible character of pure reason. Reason therefore acts 
freely; it is not dynamically determined in the chain of natural 
causes through either outer or inner grounds antecedent in 
time. This freedom ought not, therefore, to be conceived only 
negatively as independence of empirical conditions. The 
faculty of reason, so regarded, would cease to be a cause of 
B 1582} a PP earances - It must also be described in positive terms, as 
the power of originating a series of events. In reason itself 
nothing begins; as unconditioned condition of every voluntary 
act, it admits of no conditions antecedent to itself in time. Its 
effect has, indeed, a beginning in the series of appearances, 
but never in this series an absolutely first beginning. 



ANTINOMY OF PURE REASON 477 

In order to illustrate this regulative principle of reason by 
an example of its empirical employment not, however, to con- 
firm it, for it is useless to endeavour to prove transcendental 
propositions by examples let us take a voluntary action, for 
example, a malicious lie by which a certain confusion has been 
caused in society. First of all, we endeavour to discover the 
motives to which it has been due, and then, secondly, in the 
light of these, we proceed to determine how far the action and 
its consequences can be imputed to the offender. As regards the 
first question, we trace the empirical character of the action to 
its sources, finding these in defective education, bad company, 
in part also in the viciousness of a natural disposition insensitive 
to shame, in levity and thoughtlessness, not neglecting to take 
into account also the occasional causes that may have inter- 
vened. We proceed in this enquiry just as we should in ascer- 
taining for a given natural effect the series of its determining 
causes. But although we believe that the action is thus deter- c A 555 
mined, we none the less blame the agent, not indeed on account \ B 5 8 3 
of his unhappy disposition, nor on account of the circum- 
stances that have influenced him, nor even on account of his 
previous way of life; for we presuppose that we can leave out of 
consideration what this way of life may have been, that we can 
regard the past series of conditions as not having occurred and 
the act as being completely unconditioned by any preceding 
state, just as if the agent in and by himself began in this action 
an entirely new series of consequences. Our blame is based on 
a law of reason whereby we regard reason as a cause that 
irrespective of all the above-mentioned empirical conditions 
could have determined, and ought to have determined, the 
agent to act otherwise. This causality of reason we do not re- 
gard as only a co-operating agency, but as complete in itself, 
even when the sensuous impulses do not favour but are directly 
opposed to it; the action is ascribed to the agent's intelligible 
character; in the moment when he utters the lie, the guilt is 
entirely his. Reason, irrespective of all empirical conditions of 
the act, is completely free, and the lie is entirely due to its 
default. 

Such imputation clearly shows that we consider reason to 
be unaffected by these sensible influences, and not liable to 
alteration. Its appearances the modes in which it manifests 



478 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

B 584} i* se lf m i ts effects do alter; but in itself [so we consider] there 
is no preceding state determining the state that follows. That 
is to say, it does not belong to the series of sensible conditions 
which render appearances necessary in accordance with laws 
of nature. Reason is present in all the actions of men at all 
times and under all circumstances, and is always the same; 
but it is not itself in time, and does not fall into any new state 
in which it was not before. In respect to new states, it is deter- 
mining^ not determinate. We may not, therefore, ask why 
reason has not determined itself differently, but only why it 
has not through its causality determined the appearances differ- 
ently. But to this question no answer is possible. For a different 
intelligible character would have given a different empirical 
character. When we say that in spite of his whole previous 
course of life the agent could have refrained from lying, this 
only means that the act is under the immediate power of reason, 
and that reason in its causality is not subject to any conditions 
of appearance or of time. Although difference of time makes a 
fundamental difference to appearances in their relations to one 
another for appearances are not things in themselves and 
therefore not causes in themselves it can make no difference 
to the relation in which the action stands to reason. 

B ^ j Thus in our judgments in regard to the causality of free 
actions, we can get as far as the intelligible cause, but not be- 
yond it. We can know that it is free, that is, that it is deter- 
mined independently of sensibility, and that in this way it may 
be the sensibly unconditioned condition of appearances. But 
to explain why in the given circumstances the intelligible char- 
acter should give just these appearances and this empirical 
character transcends all the powers of our reason, indeed all 
its rights of questioning, just as if we were to ask why the trans- 
cendental object of our outer sensible intuition gives intuition 
in space only and not some other mode of intuition. But the 
problem which we have to solve does not require us to raise any 
such questions. Our problem was this only: whether freedom 
and natural necessity can exist without conflict in one and the 
same action; and this we have sufficiently answered. We have 
shown that since freedom may stand in relation to a quite 
different kind of conditions from those of natural necessity, 
the law of the latter does not affect the former, and that both 



ANTINOMY OF PURE REASON 479 

may exist, independently of one another and without inter- 
fering with each other. 



The reader should be careful to observe that in what has 
been said our intention has not been to establish the reality 
of freedom as one of the faculties which contain the cause of 
the appearances of our sensible world. For that enquiry, as it 
does not deal with concepts alone, would not have been trans- 
cendental. And further, it could not have been successful, 
since we can never infer from experience anything which can- 
not be thought in accordance with the laws of experience. It 
has not even been our intention to prove the possibility of 
freedom. For in this also we should not have succeeded, since 
we cannot from mere concepts a priori know the possibility 
of any real ground and its causality. Freedom is here being 
treated only as a transcendental idea whereby reason is led to 
think that it can begin the series of conditions in the [field of] 
appearance by means of the sensibly unconditioned, and so 
becomes involved in an antinomy with those very laws which 
it itself prescribes to the empirical employment of the under- 
standing. What we have alone been able to show, and what we 
have alone been concerned to show, is that this antinomy rests 
on a sheer illusion, and that causality through freedom is at 
least not incompatible with nature. 

IV 

Solution of the Cosmological Idea of the Totality of the De- |g 
pendence of Appearances as regards their Existence in 
general 

In the preceding subsection we have considered the changes 
of the sensible world in so far as they form a dynamical 
series, each member being subordinate to another as effect to 
cause. We shall now employ this series of states merely to 
guide us in our search for an existence that may serve as 
the supreme condition of all that is alterable, that is, in 
our search for necessary being. We are concerned here, not 
with unconditioned causality, but with tl\e unconditioned 
existence of substance itself. The series which we have in 



480 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

view is, therefore, really a series of concepts, not a series 
of intuitions in which one intuition is the condition of the 
other. 

But it is evident that since everything in the sum-total 
of appearances is alterable, and therefore conditioned in its 
existence, there cannot be in the whole series of dependent ex- 
istence any unconditioned member the existence of which can 
be regarded as absolutely necessary. Hence, if appearances 
were things in themselves, and if, as would then follow, the 
condition and the conditioned always belonged to one and the 
same series of intuitions, by no possibility could a necessary 

B ^88 1 b em ex i s t as the condition of the existence of appearances in 
the world of sense. 

The dynamical regress is distinguished in an important re- 
spect from the mathematical. Since the mathematical regress 
is concerned only with the combining of parts to form a whole, 
or the division of a whole into parts, the conditions of this 
series must always be regarded as parts of the series, and there- 
fore as homogeneous and as appearances. In the dynamical 
regress, on the other hand, we are concerned, not with the pos- 
sibility of an unconditioned whole of given parts, or with ( an 
unconditioned part for a given whole, but with the derivation 
of a state from its cause, or of the contingent existence of sub- 
stance itself from necessary existence. 1 In this latter regress, it 
is not, therefore, necessary that the condition should form part 
of an empirical series along with the conditioned. 

A way of escape from this apparent antinomy thus lies 
open to us. Both of the conflicting propositions may be true, 
if taken in different connections. All things in the world of 
sense may be contingent, and so have only an empirically 
conditioned existence, while yet there may be a non-empirical 
condition of the whole series; that is, there may exist an un- 
conditionally necessary being. This necessary being, as the 
intelligible condition of the series, would not belong to it as a 

Q 5g* j member, not even as the highest member of it, nor would it 
render any member of the series empirically unconditioned. 
The whole sensible world, so far as regards the empirically 
conditioned existence of all its various members, would be left 
unaffected. Thi^ way of conceiving how an unconditioned 

1 [Reading dent for der.] 



ANTINOMY OF PURE REASON 481 

being may serve as the ground of appearance differs from that 
which we followed in the preceding subsection, in dealing with 
the empirically unconditioned causality of freedom. For there 
the thing itself was as cause (substantia phaenomenon) con- 
ceived to belong to the series of conditions, and only its 
causality was thought as intelligible. Here, on the other hand, 
the necessary being must be thought as entirely outside the 
series of the sensible world (as ens extramundanum), and as 
purely intelligible. In no other way can it be secured against 
the law which renders all appearances contingent and de- 
pendent. 

The regulative principle of reason, so far as it bears upon 
our present problem, is therefore this, that everything in the 
sensible world has an empirically conditioned existence, and 
that in no one of its qualities can it be unconditionally neces- 
sary; that for every member in the series of conditions we must 
expect, and as far as possible seek, an empirical condition in 
some possible experience; and that nothing justifies us in 
deriving an existence from a condition outside the empirical 
series or even in regarding it in its place within the series as 
absolutely independent and self-sufficient. At the same time 
this principle does not in any way debar us from recognis- 
ing that the whole series may rest upon some intelligible being 
that is free from all empirical conditions and itself contains 
the ground of the possibility of all appearances. 

In these remarks we have no intention of proving the un- 
conditionally necessary existence of such a being, or even of 
establishing the possibility of a purely intelligible condition of 
the existence of appearances in the sensible world. Just as, on 
the one hand, we limit reason, lest in leaving the guiding- 
thread of the empirical conditions it should go straying into 
the transcendent, adopting grounds of explanation that are 
incapable of any representation in concrete, so, on the other 
hand, we limit the law of the purely empirical employment of 
the understanding, lest it should presume to decide as to the 
possibility of things in general, and should declare the in- 
telligible to be impossible, merely on the ground that it is 
not of any use in explaining appearances. Thus all that we 
have shown is that the thoroughgoing contingency of all 
natural things, and of all their empirical conditions, is quite 



482 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

consistent with the optional assumption of a necessary, though 
purely intelligible, condition; and that as there is no real con- 
tradiction between the two assertions, both may be true. Such 
an absolutely necessary being, as conceived by the under- 
standing, 1 may be in itself impossible, but this can in no wise 

B 591} be inferred from the universal contingency and dependence of 
everything belonging to the sensible world, nor from the prin- 
ciple which interdicts us from stopping at any one of its con- 
tingent members and from appealing to a cause outside the 
world. Reason proceeds by one path in its empirical use, and 
by yet another path in its transcendental use. 

The sensible world contains nothing but appearances, and 
these are mere representations which are always sensibly con- 
ditioned; in this field things in themselves are never objects to 
us. It is not therefore surprising that in dealing with a member 
of the empirical series, no matter what member it may be, we 
are never justified in making a leap out beyond the context 2 
of sensibility. To do so is to treat the appearances as if they 
were things in themselves which exist apart from their tran- 
scendental ground, and which can remain standing while we 
seek an outside cause of their existence. This certainly woilld 
ultimately be the case with contingent things, but not with 
mere representations of things, the contingency of which is 
itself merely phenomenon, and can lead to no other regress 
than that which determines the phenomena, that is, solely to 
the empirical regress. On the other hand, to think an intelli- 
gible ground of the appearances, that is, of the sensible world, 
and to think it as free from the contingency of appearances, 
does not conflict either with the unlimited empirical regress in 
the series of appearances nor with their thoroughgoing con- 

g 5^ 4 j tingency. That, indeed, is all that we had to do in order to 
remove the apparent antinomy; and it can be done in this way 
only. If for everything conditioned in its existence the con- 
dition is always sensible, and therefore belongs to the series, 
it must itself in turn be conditioned, as we have shown in the 
antithesis of the fourth antinomy. Either, therefore, reason 
through its demand for the unconditioned must remain in 
conflict with itself, or this unconditioned must be posited out- 
side the series, in the intelligible. Its necessity will not then 

1 [ Vcrstandeswesen^ * \cmsser dem ZysGmmenhangeI\ 



ANTINOMY OF PURE REASON 483 

require, or allow of, any empirical condition; so far as appear- 
ances are concerned, it will be unconditionally necessary. 

The empirical employment of reason, in reference to the 
conditions of existence in the sensible world, is not affected by 
the admission of a purely intelligible being; it proceeds, in 
accordance with the principle of thoroughgoing contingency, 
from empirical conditions to higher conditions which are 
always again empirical. But it is no less true, when what we 
have in view is the pure employment of reason, in reference 
to ends, 1 that this regulative principle does not exclude the 
assumption of an intelligible cause which is not in the series. 
For the intelligible cause then signifies only the purely tran- 
scendental and to us unknown ground of the possibility of the 
sensible series in general. Its existence as independent of all 
sensible conditions and as in respect of these conditions un- 
conditionally necessary, is not inconsistent with the unlimited g 
contingency of appearances, that is to say, with the never- 
ending regress in the series of empirical conditions. 

Concluding Note on the whole Antinomy of Pure Reason. 

So long as reason, in its concepts, has in view simply the 
totality of conditions in the sensible world, and is considering 
what satisfaction in this regard it can obtain for them, our 
ideas are at once transcendental and cosmological. Immedi- 
ately, however, the unconditioned (and it is with this that we 
are really concerned) is posited in that which lies entirely outside 
the sensible world, and therefore outside all possible experi- 
ence, the ideas become transcendent. They then no longer serve 
only for the completion of the empirical employment of reason 
an 2 idea [of completeness] which must always be pursued, 
though it can never be completely achieved. On the contrary, 
they detach themselves completely from experience, and make 
for themselves objects for which experience supplies no 
material, and whose objective reality is not based on comple- 
tion of the empirical series but on pure a priori concepts. Such 
transcendent ideas have a purely intelligible object; and this 
object may indeed be admitted as a transcendental object, but 
only if we likewise admit that, for the rest, we have no know- 

1 [Zwecke.] * 

8 [Readme, with Erdmann, die 



484 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

ledge in regard to it, and that it cannot be thought as a deter- 
minate thing in terms of distinctive inner predicates. As it is 
independent of all empirical concepts, we are cut off from any 

A 566 j reasons th^ could establish the possibility of such an object, 
and have not the least justification for assuming it. It is a mere 
thought-entity. Nevertheless the cosmological idea which has 
given rise to the fourth antinomy impels us to take this step. For 
the existence of appearances, which is never self-grounded but 
always conditioned, requires us to look around for something 
different from all appearances, that is, for an intelligible object 
in which this contingency may terminate. But once we have 
allowed ourselves to assume a self-subsistent reality entirely 
outside the field of sensibility, appearances can only be viewed 1 
as contingent modes whereby beings that are themselves intelli- 
gences represent intelligible objects. Consequently, the only 
resource remaining to us is the use of analogy, by which we 
employ the concepts of experience in order to form some 
sort of concept of intelligible things things of which as 
they are in themselves we have yet not the least knowledge. 
Since the contingent is not to be known save through ex- 
perience, and we are here concerned with things which are 
not to be in any way objects of experience, we must derive 
the knowledge of them from that which is in itself necessary, 
that is, from pure concepts of things in general. Thus the 

B 5015} ver y ^ rst ste P w h* c k we ta ke beyond the world of sense 
obliges us, in seeking for such new knowledge, to begin with 
an enquiry into absolutely necessary being, and to derive from 
the concepts of it the concepts of all things in so far as they 
are purely intelligible. This we propose to do in the next 
chapter. 

1 [Reading, with Hartenstein, anzuseken sind for anzusehen.] 



TRANSCENDENTAL DIALECTIC 

BOOK II 
CHAPTER III 

THE IDEAL OF PURE REASON 

Section I 
THE IDEAL IN GENERAL 

WE have seen above that no objects can be represented 
through pure concepts of understanding, apart from the con- 
ditions of sensibility. For the conditions of the objective 
reality of the concepts are then absent, and nothing is to be 
found in them save the mere form of thought. If, however, 
they are applied to appearances, they can be exhibited in 
concrete, because in the appearances they obtain the appro- 
priate material for concepts of experience a concept of ex- 
perience being nothing but a concept of understanding in 
concreto. But ideas are even further removed from objective 
reality than are categories, for no appearance can be found in 
which they can be represented in concreto. They contain a 
certain completeness to which no possible empirical know- |g 5 
ledge ever attains. In them reason aims only at a systematic 
unity, to which it seeks to approximate the unity that is em- 
pirically possible, without ever completely reaching it. 

But what I entitle the ideal seems to be further removed 
from objective reality even than the idea. By the ideal I under- 
stand the idea, not merely in concreto, but in individuo, that is, 
as an individual 1 thing, determinable or even determined by 
the idea alone. 

Humanity [as an idea] in its complete perfection contains 
not only all the essential qualities which belong to human 
nature and constitute our concept of it an&lt;4 these so extended 

1 [einze/nes.] 
485 



486 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

as to be in that complete conformity with their ends which 
would be our idea of perfect humanity but also everything 
which, in addition to this concept, is required for the complete 
determination of the idea. For of all contradictory predicates 
one only [of each pair] can apply to the idea of the perfect 
man. What to us is an ideal was in Plato's view an idea of 
the divine understanding, an individual 1 object of its pure 
intuition, the most perfect of every kind of possible being, 
and the archetype 2 of all copies in the [field of] appearance. 

B 597} Without soaring so high, we are yet bound to confess that 
human reason contains not only ideas, but ideals also, which 
although they do not have, like the Platonic ideas, creative 
power, yet have practical power (as regulative principles), and 
form the basis of the possible perfection of certain actions. 
Moral concepts, as resting on something empirical (pleasure 
or displeasure), are not completely pure concepts of reason. 
None the less, in respect of the principle whereby reason sets 
bounds to a freedom which is in itself without law, these con- 
cepts (when we attend merely to their form) may well serve as 
examples of pure concepts of reason. Virtue, and therewith 
human wisdom in its complete purity, are ideas. The wise 
man (of the Stoics) is, however, an ideal, that is, a man exist- 
ing in thought only, but in complete conformity with the idea 
of wisdom. As the idea gives the rule, so the ideal in such a 
case serves as the archetype for the complete determination 
of the copy; and we have no other standard for our actions 
than the conduct of this divine man within us, with which 
we compare and judge ourselves, and so reform ourselves, 
although we can never attain to the perfection thereby pre- 
scribed. Although we cannot concede to these ideals objective 
reality (existence), they are not therefore to be regarded as 
figments of the brain; they supply reason with a standard 
which is indispensable to it, providing it, as they do, with a 

B 598 } conce pt f that which is entirely complete in its kind, and 
thereby enabling it to estimate and to measure the degree and 
the defects of the incomplete. But to attempt to realise the 
ideal in an example, that is, in the [field of] appearance, as, for 
instance, to depict the [character of the perfectly] wise man in 
a romance, is impracticable. There is indeed something absurd, 

1 [einze/nes.] * \Urgrund^\ 



IDEAL OF PURE REASON 487 

and far from edifying, in such an attempt, inasmuch as the 
natural limitations, which are constantly doing violence to the 
completeness of the idea, make the illusion that is aimed at 
altogether impossible, and so cast suspicion on the good itself 
the good that has its source in the idea by giving it the air 
of being a mere fiction. 

Such is the nature of the ideal of reason, which must 
always rest on determinate concepts and serve as a rule and 
archetype, alike in our actions and in our critical judgments. 
The products of the imagination are of an entirely different 
nature; no one can explain or give an intelligible concept of 
them; each is a kind of monogram^ a mere set of particular 
qualities, determined by no assignable rule, and forming 
rather a blurred sketch drawn from diverse experiences than a 
determinate image a representation such as painters and 
physiognomists profess to carry in their heads, and which they 
treat as being an incommunicable shadowy image 1 of their 
creations or even of their critical judgments. Such repre- 
sentations may be entitled, though improperly, ideals of 
sensibility, inasmuch as they are viewed as being models 
(not indeed realisable) of possible empirical intuitions, and yet |g 57* 
furnish no rules that allow of being explained and examined. 

Reason, in its ideal, aims, on the contrary, at complete 
determination in accordance with a priori rules. Accordingly 
it thinks for itself an object which it regards as being com- 
pletely determinable in accordance with principles, The 
conditions that are required for such determination are not, 
however, to be found in experience, and the concept itself is 
therefore transcendent. 



CHAPTER III 
Section 2 

THE TRANSCENDENTAL IDEAL 
(Prototypon Trans cendentale) 

Every concept is, in respect of what is not contained in it, 
undetermined, and is subject to the principle of determin- 

1 [Schattenbtld.] 



488 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

ability. According to this principle, of every two contradict- 
orily opposed predicates only one can belong to a concept. 
This principle is based on the law of contradiction, and is 
therefore a purely logical principle. As such, it abstracts from 
the entire content of knowledge and is concerned solely with 
its logical form. 

But every thing, as regards its possibility, is likewise sub- 
ject to the principle of complete determination, according to 

B 600} w hi cn if &amp;H the possible predicates of things be taken together 
with their contradictory opposites, then one of each pair of 
contradictory opposites must belong to it. This principle 1 does 
not rest merely on the law of contradiction; for, besides con- 
sidering each thing in its relation to the two contradictory 
predicates, it also considers it in its relation to the sum of 
all possibilities, that is, to the sum-total of all predicates of 
things. Presupposing this sum as being an a priori condition, 
it proceeds to represent everything as deriving its own pos- 
sibility from the share which it possesses in this sum of all 
possibilities." The principle of complete determination con- 
cerns, therefore, the content, and not merely the logical form. 
It is the principle of the synthesis of all predicates which aVe 
intended to constitute the complete concept of a thing, and not 
simply a principle of analytic representation in referen ce merely 
to one of two contradictory predicates. It contains a transcend- 

B 601} en tal presupposition, namely, that of the material for all 
possibility, which in turn is regarded as containing a priori 
the data/0r the particular possibility of each and every thing. 
The proposition, everything which exists is completely de- 
termined, does not mean only that one of every pair of given 
contradictory predicates, but that one of every [pair ot] possible 

In accordance with this principle, each and every thing is there- 
fore related to a common correlate, the sum of all possibilities. If this 
correlate (that is, the material for all possible predicates) should be 
found in the idea of some one thing, it would prove an affinity of all 
possible things, through the identity of the ground of their complete 
determination, Whereas the determinability of every concept is sub- 
ordinate to the universality (universalitas) of the principle of ex- 
cluded middle, the determination of a thing is subordinate to the 
totality (universitas) or sum of all possible predicates. 

1 [Reading, with *rdmann, Dieser . . . er ... er ... er for Dieses . . . es 

. . . e s . . . es.] 



IDEAL OF PURE REASON 489 

predicates, must always belong to it. In terms of this proposi- 
tion the predicates are not merely compared with one another 
logically, but the thing itself is compared, in transcendental 
fashion, with the sum of all possible predicates. What the pro- 
position therefore asserts is this: that to know a thing com- 
pletely, we must know every possible [predicate], and must 
determine it thereby, either affirmatively or negatively. The 
complete determination is thus a concept, which, in its 
totality, can never be exhibited in concrete. It is based upon 
an idea, which has its seat solely in the faculty of reason 
the faculty which prescribes to the understanding the rule of 
its complete employment. 

Although this idea of the sum of all possibility -, in so far 
as it serves as the condition of the complete determination of 
each and every thing, is itself undetermined in respect of the 
predicates which may constitute it, and is thought by us as 
being nothing more than the sum of all possible predicates, 
we yet find, on closer scrutiny, that this idea, as a primordial 
concept, excludes a number of predicates which as derivative 
are already given through other predicates or which are in- | 
compatible with others; and that it does, indeed, define itself 
as a concept that is completely determinate a priori. It thus 
becomes the concept of an individual 1 object which is com- 
pletely determined through the mere idea, and must there- 
fore be entitled an ideal of pure reason. 

When we consider all possible predicates, not merely 
logically, but transcendentally, that is, with reference to such 
content as can be thought a priori as belonging to them, we 
find that through some of them we represent a being, through 
others a mere not-being. Logical negation, which is indi- 
cated simply through the word not, does not properly refer 
to a concept, but only to its relation to another concept in a 
judgment, and is therefore quite insufficient to determine a 
concept in respect of its content. The expression non-mortal 
does not enable us to declare that we are thereby representing 
in the object a mere not-being; the expression leaves all con- 
tent unaffected. A transcendental negation, on the other hand, 
signifies not-being in itself, and is opposed to transcendental 
affirmation, which is a something the very ^concept of which 

1 [einze Inert.] 



490 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

in itself expresses a being. Transcendental affirmation is there- 
fore entitled reality, 1 because through it alone, and so far only 
A 575 \ as it reaches, are objects something (things), whereas its 
opposite, negation, signifies a mere want, and, so far as it 
alone is thought, represents the abrogation of all thinghood. 2 

Now no one can think a negation determinately, save by 
basing it upon the opposed affirmation. Those born blind can- 
not have the least notion of darkness, since they have none of 
light. The savage knows nothing of poverty, since he has no 
acquaintance with wealth. The ignorant have no concept of 
their ignorance, because they have none of knowledge, etc. a 
All concepts of negations are thus derivative; it is the realities 
which contain the data, and, so to speak, the material or 
transcendental content, for the possibility and complete 
determination of all things. 

If, therefore, reason employs in the complete determina- 
tion of things a transcendental substrate that contains, as 
it were, the whole store of material from which all possible 
predicates of things must be taken, this substrate cannot be 
B 604} an ything else than the idea of an omnitudo realitatis? All 
true negations are nothing but limitations a title which 
would be inapplicable, were they not thus based upon the 
unlimited, that is, upon "the All." 4 

But the concept of what thus possesses all reality is just the 
concept of a thing in itself &amp;$ completely determined; and since 
in all possible [pairs of] contradictory predicates one predi- 
cate, namely, that which belongs to being absolutely, is to be 
found in its determination, the concept of an ens realissimum 
is the concept of an individual 5 being. It is therefore a tran- 
scendental ideal which serves as basis for the complete deter- 

The observations and calculations of astronomers have taught 
us much that is wonderful; but the most important lesson that they 
have taught us has been by revealing the abyss of our ignorance, 
which otherwise we could never have conceived to be so great. 
Reflection upon the ignorance thus disclosed must produce a great 
change in our estimate of the purposes for which our reason should 
be employed. [In both A and B this note is attached, presumably 
by inadvertence, to the preceding sentence.] 

1 \Realitdt (Sachheit).] [die Aufhebung alks Dinges^ 

8 [von einem All dqr Realitdt (omnitudo realitatis).] 
4 [das AIL] 5 [einzelnen.] 



IDEAL OF PURE REASON 491 

mination that necessarily belongs to all that exists. This ideal 
is the supreme and complete material condition of the possi- 
bility of all that exists the condition to which all thought of 
objects, so far as their content is concerned, has to be traced 
back. It is also the only true 1 ideal of which human reason is 
capable. For only in this one case is a concept of a thing a con- 
cept which is in itself universal completely determined in and 
through itself, and known as the representation of an individual. 2 

The logical determination of a concept by reason is based 
upon a disjunctive syllogism, in which the major premiss 
contains a logical division (the division of the sphere of a 
universal concept), the minor premiss limiting this sphere to 
a certain part, and the conclusion determining the concept by | B ^ 
means of this part. The universal concept of a reality in general 
cannot be divided a priori, because without experience we do 
not know any determinate kinds of reality which would be con- 
tained under that genus. The transcendental major premiss 
which is presupposed in the complete determination of all 
things is therefore no other than the representation of the sum 
of all reality; it is not merely a concept which, as regards its 
transcendental content, comprehends all predicates under 
itself] it also contains them within itself] and the complete 
determination of any and every thing rests on the limitation of 
this total reality, 8 inasmuch as part of it is ascribed to the thing, 
and the rest is excluded a procedure which is in agreement 
with the 'either or' of the disjunctive major premiss and with 
the determination of the object, in the minor premiss, through 
one of the members of the division. Accordingly, reason, in em- 
ploying the transcendental ideal as that by reference to which 
it determines all possible things, is proceeding in a manner 
analogous with its procedure in disjunctive syllogisms this, 
indeed, is the principle upon which I have based the system- 
atic division of all transcendental ideas, as parallel with, and 
corresponding to, the three kinds of syllogism. 

It is obvious that reason, in achieving its purpose, that, 
namely, of representing the necessary complete determination 
of things, does not presuppose the existence of a being that | B |^ 
corresponds to this ideal, but only the idea of such a being, and 
this only for the purpose of deriving from an unconditioned 

1 [eigentliche.] * [Indtviduum.] s [dieses All der Realitdt.] 



492 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

totality of complete determination the conditioned totality, 
that is, the totality of the limited. The ideal is, therefore, the 
archetype 1 {prototypon) of all things, which one and all, as 
imperfect copies (ectypa), derive from it the material of their 
possibility, and while approximating to it in varying degrees, 
yet always fall very far short of actually attaining it. 

All possibility of things (that is, of the synthesis of the mani- 
fold, in respect of its content) must therefore be regarded as 
derivative, with only one exception, namely, the possibility of 
that which includes in itself all reality. This latter possibility 
must be regarded as original. For all negations (which are the 
only predicates through which anything can be distinguished 
from the ens realissimum) are merely limitations of a greater, 
and ultimately of the highest, reality; and they therefore pre- 
suppose this reality, and are, as regards their content, derived 
from it. All manifoldness of things is only a correspondingly 
varied mode of limiting the concept of the highest reality which 
forms their common substratum, just as all figures are only pos- 
sible as so many different modes of limiting infinite space. The 
object of the ideal of reason, an object which is present to us only 
in and through reason, is therefore entitled the primordial being 
(ens originarium) . As it has nothing above it, it is also entitled 
the highest being (ens summum)\ and as everything that is con- 
B 607} ditioned is subject to it, the being of all beings (ens entium). 
These terms are not, however, to be taken as signifying the 
objective relation of an actual object to other things, but of an 
idea to concepts. We are left entirely without knowledge as to 
the existence of a being of such outstanding pre-eminence. 

We cannot say that a primordial being consists of a number 
of derivative beings, for since the latter presuppose the former 
they cannot themselves constitute it. The idea of the prim- 
ordial being must therefore be thought as simple. 

Consequently, the derivation of all other possibility from 
this primordial being cannot, strictly speaking, be regarded as 
a limitation of its supreme reality, and, as it were, a division 
of it. For in that case the primordial being would be treated as a 
mere aggregate of derivative beings; and this, as we have just 
shown, is impossible, although in our first rough statements 
we have used such language. On the contrary, the supreme 

1 [Urbild.] 



IDEAL OF PURE REASON 493 

reality must condition the possibility of all things as their 
ground, not as their sum\ and the manifoldness of things 
must therefore rest, not on the limitation of the primordial 
being itself, but on all that follows from it, including therein 
all our sensibility, and all reality in the [field of] appearance 
existences of a kind which cannot, as ingredients, belong 
to the idea of the supreme being. 

If, in following up this idea of ours, we proceed to hypos- |g 
tatise it, we shall be able to determine the primordial being 
through the mere concept of the highest reality, as a being that 
is one, simple, all-sufficient, eternal, etc. In short, we shall be 
able to determine it, in its unconditioned completeness, through 
all predicaments. The concept of such a being is the concept of 
God, taken in the transcendental sense; and the ideal of pure 
reason, as above defined, is thus the object of a transcendental 
theology. 

In any such use of the transcendental idea we should, how- 
ever, be overstepping the limits of its purpose and validity. 
For reason, in employing it as a basis for the complete deter- 
mination of things, has used it only as the concept of all reality, 
without requiring that all this reality be objectively given and 
be itself a thing. Such a thing is a mere fiction in which we 
combine and realise the manifold of our idea in an ideal, 
as an individual 1 being. But we have no right to do this, 
nor even to assume the possibility of such an hypothesis. Nor 
do any of the consequences which flow from such an ideal have 
any bearing upon the complete determination of things, or 
exercise in that regard the least influence; and it is solely as 
aiding in their determination that the idea has been shown to 
be necessary. 

But merely to describe the procedure of our reason and its jg 
dialectic does not suffice; we must also endeavour to discover 
the sources of this dialectic, that we may be able to explain, as 
a phenomenon of the understanding, the illusion to which it 
has given rise. For the ideal, of which we are speaking, is 
based on a natural, not on a merely arbitrary idea. The ques- 
tion to be raised is therefore this: how does it happen that 
reason regards all possibility of things as derived from one 
single fundamental possibility, namely, tha^t of the highest 

1 [besonderen.] 



494 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

reality, and thereupon presupposes this to be contained in an 
individual 1 primordial being? 

The answer is obvious from the discussions in the Tran- 
scendental Analytic. The possibility of the objects of the senses 
is a relation of these objects to our thought, in which some- 
thing (namely, the empirical form) can be thought a priori, 
while that which constitutes the matter, reality in the [field of] 
appearance (that which corresponds to sensation), must be 
given, since otherwise it could not even be thought, nor its 
possibility represented. Now an object of the senses can be 
completely determined only when it is compared with all the 
predicates that are possible in the [field of] appearance, and 
by means of them 2 is represented either affirmatively or nega- 
tively. But since that which constitutes the thing itself, namely, 
the real in the [field of] appearance, must be given other- 
wise the thing could not be conceived at all and since that 
B 6 82 } wnerem tne rea l f a ^ appearances is given is experience, 
considered as single and all-embracing, the material for the 
possibility of all objects of the senses must be presupposed as 
given in one whole; 3 and it is upon the limitation of this whole 
that all possibility of empirical objects, their distinction from 
each other and their complete determination, can alone be 
based. No other objects, besides those of the senses, can, as a 
matter of fact, be given to us, and nowhere save in the con- 
text of a possible experience; and consequently nothing is an 
object for us, unless it presupposes the sum 4 of all empirical 
reality as the condition of its possibility. Now owing to a 
natural illusion we regard this principle, which applies only 
to those things which are given as objects of our senses, as 
being a principle which must be valid of things in general. 
Accordingly, omitting this limitation, we treat the empirical 
principle of our concepts of the possibility of things, viewed as 
appearances, as being a transcendental principle of the pos- 
sibility of things in general. 

If we thereupon proceed to hypostatise this idea of the sum 
of all reality, that is because we substitute dialectically for 
the distributive unity of the empirical employment of the 
understanding, the collective unity of experience as a whole; 

1 \besonderen.] ' a [Reading, with Hartenstein, dteselben for dieselbe\ 
9 [in einem Inbegriffe.} * [Inbegrijf \\ 



IDEAL OF PURE REASON 495 

and then thinking this whole [realm] of appearance as one 
single thing that contains all empirical reality in itself; and 
then again, in turn, by means of the above-mentioned tran- {3 
scendental subreption, substituting for it the concept of a thing 
which stands at the source of the possibility of all things, and 
supplies the real conditions for their complete determination. 



CHAPTER III 
Section 3 

THE ARGUMENTS OF SPECULATIVE REASON IN PROOF 
OF THE EXISTENCE OF A SUPREME BEING 

Notwithstanding this pressing need of reason to presup- 
pose something that may afford the understanding a sufficient 
foundation for the complete determination of its concepts, it 
is yet much too easily conscious of the ideal and merely fic- 
titious character of such a presupposition to allow itself, on 
this ground alone, to be persuaded that a mere creature of its |g 
own thought is a real being were it not that it is impelled from 
another direction to seek a resting-place in the regress from 
the conditioned, which is given, to the unconditioned. This 
unconditioned is not, indeed, given as being in itself real, nor 
as having a reality that follows from its mere concept; it is, 
however, what alone can complete the series of conditions 
when we proceed to trace these conditions to their grounds. 
This is the course which our human reason, by its very nature, 
leads all of us, even the least reflective, to adopt, though not 
everyone continues to pursue it. It begins not with concepts, 
but with common experience, and thus bases itself on some- 

This ideal of the ens realissimum, although it is indeed a mere 
representation, is first realised, that is, made into an object, then 
hypostatised, and finally, by the natural progress of reason towards 
the completion of unity, is, as we shall presently show, personified. 
For the regulative unity of experience is not based on the appear- 
ances themselves (on sensibility alone), but on the connection of the 
manifold through the understanding (in an apperception); and con- 
sequently the unity of the supreme reality and the complete deter- 
minability (possibility) of all things seems to .lie in a supreme 
understanding, and therefore in an intelligence. 



496 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

thing actually existing. But if this ground does not rest upon 
the immovable rock of the absolutely necessary, it yields be- 
neath our feet. And this latter support is itself in turn without 
support, if there be any empty space beyond and under it, and 
if it does not itself so fill all things as to leave no room for any 
further question unless, that is to say, it be infinite in its 
reality. 

If we admit something as existing, no matter what this 
something may be, we must also admit that there is something 
which exists necessarily. For the contingent exists only under 
the condition of some other contingent existence as its cause, 
and from this again we must infer yet another cause, until we 
are brought to a cause which is not contingent, and which is 
therefore unconditionally necessary. This is the argument upon 
which reason bases its advance to the primordial being. 

B 613} Now reason looks around for a concept that squares with 
so supreme a mode of existence as that of unconditioned ne- 
cessity not for the purpose of inferring a priori from the con- 
cept the existence of that for which it stands (for if that were 
what it claimed to do, it ought to limit its enquiries to mere 
concepts, and would not then require a given existence as its 
basis), but solely in order to find among its various concepts 
that concept which is in no respect incompatible with absolute 
necessity. For that there must be something that exists with 
absolute necessity, is regarded as having been established by 
the first step in the argument. If, then, in removing every- 
thing which is not compatible with this necessity, only one 
existence remains, this existence must be the absolutely 
necessary being, whether or not its necessity be comprehen- 
sible, that is to say, deducible from its concept alone. 

Now that which in its concept contains a therefore for 
every wherefore, that which is in no respect defective, that 
which is in every way sufficient as a condition, seems to be 
precisely the being to which absolute necessity can fittingly 
be ascribed. For while it contains the conditions of all that 
is possible, it itself does not require and indeed does not 
allow of any condition, and therefore satisfies, at least in this 
one feature, the concept of unconditioned necessity. In this 

B 614} res P ect a M other concepts must fall short of it; for since they 
are deficient and in need of completion, they cannot have as 



IDEAL OF PURE REASON 497 

their characteristic this independence of all further conditions. 
We are not indeed justified in arguing that what does not con- 
tain the highest and in all respects complete condition is there- 
fore itself conditioned in its existence. But we are justified in 
saying that it does not possess that one feature through which 
alone reason is in a position, by means of an a priori concept, 
to know, in regard to any being, that it is unconditioned. 

The concept of an ens realissimum is therefore, of all con- 
cepts of possible things, that which best squares with the con- 
cept of an unconditionally necessary being; and though it may 
not be completely adequate to it, we have no choice in the 
matter, but find ourselves constrained to hold to it. For we 
cannot afford to dispense with the existence of a necessary 
being; and once its existence is granted, we cannot, in the 
whole field of possibility, find anything that can make a 
better grounded claim [than the ens realissimum] to such 
pre-eminence in the mode of its existence. 

Such, then, is the natural procedure of human reason. It 
begins by persuading itself of the existence of some necessary 
being. This being it apprehends as having an existence that 
is 'unconditioned. It then looks around for the concept of that 
which is independent of any condition, and finds it in that 
which is itself the sufficient condition of all else, that is, in that j 5^7 
which contains all reality. But that which is all-containing and 
without limits is absolute unity, and involves the concept of a 
single being that is likewise the supreme being. Accordingly, 
we conclude that the supreme being, as primordial ground 
of all things, must exist by absolute necessity. 

If what we have in view is the coming to a decision if, that 
is to say, the existence of some sort of necessary being is taken 
as granted, and if it be agreed further that we must come to 
a decision as to what it is then the foregoing way of thinking 
must be allowed to have a certain cogency. For in that case 
no better choice can be made, or rather we have no choice 
at all, but find ourselves compelled to decide in favour of the 
absolute unity of complete reality, as the ultimate source of 
possibility. If, however, we are not required to come to any 
decision, and prefer to leave the issue open until the weight 
of the evidence is such as to compel assent; it, in other words, 
what we have to do is merely to estimate how much we really 

2 K 



498 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

know in the matter, and how much we merely flatter ourselves 
that we know, then the foregoing argument is far from ap- 
pearing in so advantageous a light, and special favour is 
required to compensate for the defectiveness of its claims. 
For if we take the issue as being that which is here stated, 

B 6i6J namG tyyfi rs t&gt; tnat from any given existence (it may be, merely 
my own existence) we can correctly infer the existence of an 
unconditionally necessary being; secondly, that we must regard 
a being which contains all reality, and therefore every condi- 
tion, as being absolutely unconditioned, and that in this con- 
cept of an ens realissimum we have therefore found the concept 
of a thing to which we can also ascribe absolute necessity 
granting all this, it by no means follows that the concept of a 
limited being which does not have the highest reality is for 
that reason incompatible with absolute reality. For although 
I do not find in its concept that unconditioned which is in- 
volved in the concept of the totality of conditions, we are not 
justified in concluding that its existence must for this reason 
be conditioned; just as I cannot say, in the case of a hypo- 
thetical syllogism, that where a certain condition (in the case 
under discussion, the condition of completeness in accordance 
with [pure] concepts) does not hold, the conditioned also does 
not hold. On the contrary, we are entirely free to hold that 
any limited beings whatsoever, notwithstanding their being 
limited, may also be unconditionally necessary, although we 
cannot infer their necessity from the universal concepts which 
we have of them. Thus the argument has failed to give us the 
least concept of the properties of a necessary being, and indeed 
is utterly ineffective. 

But this argument continues to have a certain importance 
and to be endowed with an authority of which we cannot, 

B 617} s i m pty on tne g roun d of this objective insufficiency, at once 
proceed to divest it. For granting that there are in the idea of 
reason obligations which are completely valid, but which in 
their application to ourselves would be lacking in all reality 
that is, obligations to which there would be no motives save 
on the assumption that there exists a supreme being to give 
effect and confirmation to the practical laws, in such a situa- 
tion we should ba under an obligation to follow those concepts 
which, though they may not be objectively sufficient, are yet, 



IDEAL OF PURE REASON 499 

according to the standard of our reason, preponderant, and in 
comparison with which we know of nothing that is better and 
more convincing. The duty of deciding would thus, by a practi- 
cal addition, incline the balance so delicately preserved by the 
indecisiveness of speculation. Reason would indeed stand con- 
demned in its own judgment and there is none more circum- 
spect if, when impelled by such urgent motives, it should 
fail, however incomplete its insight, to conform its judgment 
to those pleas which are at least of greater weight than any 
others known to us. 

Though this argument, as resting on the inner insuffi- 
ciency of the contingent, is in actual fact transcendental, it is 
yet so simple and natural that, immediately it is propounded, 
it commends itself to the commonest understanding. We see 
things alter, come into being, and pass away; and these, or 
at least their state, must therefore have a cause. But the same 
question can be raised in regard to every cause that can be {3 
given in experience. Where, therefore, can we more suitably 
locate the ultimate causality than where there also exists the 
highest causality, that is, in that being which contains prim- 
ofdially in itself the sufficient ground of every 1 possible 
effect, and the concept of which we can also very easily enter- 
tain by means of the one attribute of an all-embracing per- 
fection. This supreme cause we then proceed to regard as 
absolutely necessary, inasmuch as we find it absolutely 
necessary that we should ascend to it, and find no ground for 
passing beyond it. And thus, in all peoples, there shine amidst 
the most benighted polytheism some gleams of monotheism, 
to which they have been led, not by reflection and profound 
speculation, but simply by the natural bent of the common 
understanding, as step by step it has come to apprehend its 
own requirements. 

There are only three possible ways of proving the existence 
of God by means of speculative reason. 

All the paths leading to this goal begin either from deter- 
minate experience and the specific constitution of the world of 
sense as thereby known, and ascend from it, in accordance 
with laws of causality, to the supreme cause outside the 

1 [Reading, with Erdmann, jeder for der.} 



Soo KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

world; or they start from experience which is purely indeter- 
minate, that is, from experience of existence in general; or 
finally they abstract from all experience, and argue completely 
a priori, from mere concepts, to the existence of a supreme 
g I 91 1 cause. The first proof is \hephysico-theological, the second the 
cosmological) the third the ontological. There are, and there 
can be, no others. 

I propose to show that reason is as little able to make pro- 
gress on the one path, the empirical, as on the other path, the 
transcendental, and that it stretches its wings in vain in thus 
attempting to soar above the world of sense by the mere power 
of speculation. As regards the order in which these arguments 
should be dealt with, it will be exactly the reverse of that 
which reason takes in the progress of its own development, and 
therefore of that which we have ourselves followed in the above 
account. For it will be shown that, although experience is what 
first gives occasion to this enquiry, it is the transcendental 
concept which in all such endeavours marks out the goal that 
reason has set itself to attain, and which is indeed its sole 
guide in its efforts to achieve that goal. I shall therefore 
begin with the examination of the transcendental proof, an'd 
afterwards enquire what effect the addition of the empirical 
factor can have in enhancing the force of the argument 



CHAPTER III 
Section 4 

THE IMPOSSIBILITY OF AN ONTOLOGICAL PROOF 
OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD 

It is evident, from what has been said, that the concept of 
an absolutely necessary being is a concept of pure reason, that 
is, a mere idea the objective reality of which is very far from 
being proved by the fact that reason requires it. For the idea 
instructs us only in regard to a certain unattainable complete- 
ness, and so serves rather to limit the understanding than to 
extend it to new objects. But we are here faced by what is 
indeed strange and perplexing, namely, that while the infer- 



IMPOSSIBILITY OF ONTOLOGICAL PROOF 501 

ence from a given existence in general to some absolutely 
necessary being seems to be both imperative and legitimate, 
all those conditions under which alone the understanding can 
form a concept of such a necessity are so many obstacles in 
the way of our doing so. 

In all ages men have spoken of an absolutely necessary 
being, and in so doing have endeavoured, not so much to 
understand whether and how a thing of this kind allows even 
of being thought, but rather to prove its existence. There is, 
of course, no difficulty in giving a verbal definition of the con- 
cept, namely, that it is something the non-existence of which 
is impossible. But this yields no insight into the conditions (3 J 
which make it necessary 1 to regard the non-existence of a 
thing as absolutely unthinkable. It is precisely these condi- 
tions that we desire to know, in order that we may determine 
whether or not, in resorting to this concept, we are thinking 
anything at all. The expedient of removing ail those condi- 
tions which the understanding indispensably requires in order 
to regard something as necessary, simply through the intro- 
duction of the word unconditioned, is very far from sufficing 
to* show whether I am still thinking anything in the concept 
of the unconditionally necessary, or perhaps rather nothing 
at all. 

Nay more, this concept, at first ventured upon blindly, 
and now become so completely familiar, has been supposed 
to have its meaning exhibited in a number of examples; and 
on this account all further enquiry into its intelligibility has 
seemed to be quite needless. Thus the fact that every geo- 
metrical proposition, as, for instance, that a triangle has three 
angles, is absolutely necessary, has been taken as justifying us 
in speaking of an object which lies entirely outside the sphere 
of our understanding as if we understood perfectly what it is 
that we intend to convey by the concept of that object. 

All the alleged examples are, without exception, taken 
from judgments, not from things and their existence. But the 
unconditioned necessity of judgments is not the same as an 
absolute necessity of things. The absolute necessity of the 
judgment is only a conditioned necessity of the thing, or of the 
predicate in the judgment. The above proposition does not |g | 

1 [Reading, with Noir6, notwendig for unmoglich.} 



502 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

declare that three angles are absolutely necessary, but that, 
under the condition that there is a triangle (that is, that a tri- 
angle is given), three angles will necessarily be found in it. So 
great, indeed, is the deluding influence exercised by this logi- 
cal necessity that, by the simple device of forming an a priori 
concept of a thing in such a manner as to include existence 
within the scope of its meaning, we have supposed ourselves 
to have justified the conclusion that because existence neces- 
sarily belongs to the object of this concept always under the 
condition that we posit the thing as given (as existing) we are 
also of necessity, in accordance with the law of identity, re- 
quired to posit the existence of its object, and that this being 
is therefore itself absolutely necessary and this, to repeat, for 
the reason that the existence of this being has already been 
thought in a concept which is assumed arbitrarily and on con- 
dition that we posit its object. 

If, in an identical proposition, I reject the predicate while 
retaining the subject, contradiction results; and I therefore say 
that the former belongs necessarily to the latter. But if we 
reject subject and predicate alike, there is no contradiction; 
for nothing is then left that can be contradicted, To posit a 
triangle, and yet to reject its three angles, is self-contradictory; 
but there is no contradiction in rejecting the triangle together 
with its three angles. The same holds true of the concept of an 
B623/ absolutely necessary being. If its existence is rejected, we re- 
ject the thing itself with all its predicates; and no question of 
contradiction can then arise. There is nothing outside it that 
would then be contradicted, since the necessity of the thing 
is not supposed to be derived from anything external; nor is 
there anything internal that would be contradicted, since in 
rejecting the thing itself we have at the same time rejected all 
its internal properties. 'God is omnipotent' is a necessary 
judgment. The omnipotence cannot be rejected if we posit a 
Deity, that is, an infinite being; for the two concepts are 
identical. But if we say, There is no God', neither the omni- 
potence nor any other of its predicates is given; they are one 
and all rejected together with the subject, and there is there- 
fore not the least contradiction in such a judgment. 

We have thjus seen that if the predicate of a judgment is 
rejected together with the subject, no internal contradiction 



IMPOSSIBILITY OF ONTOLOGICAL PROOF 503 

can result, and that this holds no matter what the predicate 
may be. The only way of evading this conclusion is to argue 
that there are subjects which cannot be removed, and must 
always remain. That, however, would only be another way of 
saying that there are absolutely necessary subjects; and that is 
the very assumption which I have called in question, and the 
possibility of which the above argument professes to establish. 
For I cannot form the least concept of a thing which, should 
it be rejected with all its predicates, leaves behind a contra- | B || 4 
diction; and in the absence of contradiction I have, through 
pure a priori concepts alone, no criterion of impossibility. 

Notwithstanding all these general considerations, in which 
every one must concur, we may be challenged with a case 
which is brought forward as proof that in actual fact the 
contrary holds, namely, that there is one concept, and indeed 
only one, in reference to which the not-being or rejection of its 
object is in itself contradictory, namely, the concept of the ens 
realissimum. It is declared that it possesses all reality, and 
that we are justified in assuming that such a being is possible 
(the fact that a concept does not contradict itself by no means 
proves the possibility of its object: but the contrary assertion 
I am for the moment willing to allow) . a Now [the argument 
proceeds] 'all reality' includes existence; existence is therefore 
contained in the concept of a thing that is possible. If, then, 
this thing is rejected, the internal possibility of the thing is {352? 
rejected which is self-contradictory. 

My answer is as follows. There is already a contradiction 
in introducing the concept of existence no matter under what 
title it may be disguised into the concept of a thing which 
we profess to be thinking solely in reference to its possibility. 
If that be allowed as legitimate, a seeming victory has been 

A concept is always possible if it is not self-contradictory. 
This is the logical criterion of possibility, and by it the object of the 
concept is distinguishable from the nihil negativum. But it may 
none the less be an empty concept, unless the objective reality of the 
synthesis through which the concept is generated has been specific- 
ally proved; and such proof, as we have shown above, rests on prin- 
ciples of possible experience, and not on the principle of analysis 
(the law of contradiction). This is a warning against arguing 
directly from the logical possibility of concepts to the real possibility 
of things. 



S04 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

won; but in actual fact nothing at all is said: the assertion 
is a mere tautology. We must ask: Is the proposition that 
this or that thing (which, whatever it may be, is allowed 
as possible) exists, an analytic or a synthetic proposition? If 
it is analytic, the assertion of the existence of the thing adds 
nothing to the thought of the thing; but in that case either 
the thought, which is in us, is the thing itself, or we have pre- 
supposed an existence as belonging to the realm of the possible, 
and have then, on that pretext, inferred its existence from its 
internal possibility which is nothing but a miserable tauto- 
logy. The word 'reality', which in the concept of the thing 
sounds other than the word 'existence' in the concept of the 
predicate, is of no avail in meeting this objection. For if all 
positing (no matter what it may be that is posited) is entitled 
reality, the thing with all its predicates is already posited in 
the concept of the subject, and is assumed as actual; and in the 
66261 predicate this is merely repeated. But if, on the other hand, 
we admit, as every reasonable person must, that all existential 
propositions are synthetic, how can we profess to maintain 
that the predicate of existence cannot be rejected without con- 
tradiction? This is a feature which is found only in analytic 
propositions, and is indeed precisely what constitutes their 
analytic character. 

I should have hoped to put an end to these idle and fruit- 
less disputations in a direct manner, by an accurate deter- 
mination of the concept of existence, had I not found that 
the illusion which is caused by the confusion of a logical with 
a real predicate (that is, with a predicate which determines a 
thing) is almost beyond correction. Anything we please can 
be made to serve as a logical predicate; the subject can even be 
predicated of itself; for logic abstracts from all content. But a 
determining predicate is a predicate which is added to the con- 
cept of the subject and enlarges it. Consequently, it must not 
be already contained in the concept. 

'Being* is obviously not a real predicate; that is, it is not a 
concept of something which could 1 be added to the concept of 
a thing. It is merely the positing of a thing, or of certain deter- 
minations, as existing in themselves. Logically, it is merely the 
copula of a judgment. The proposition, 'God is omnipotent', 

r 

1 [Reading, with Erdmann, kunnte for &amp;0nne.] 



IMPOSSIBILITY OF ONTOLOGICAL PROOF 505 

contains two concepts, each of which has its object God and 
omnipotence. The small word 'is' adds no new predicate, but 
only serves to posit the predicate in its relation to the subject. If, | 
now, we take the subject (God) with all its predicates (among 
which is omnipotence), and say 'God is', or 'There is a God', we 
attach no new predicate to the concept of God, but only posit the 
subject in itself with all its predicates, and indeed posit it as being 
an object that stands in relation to my concept. The content of 
both must be one and the same; nothing can have been added 
to the concept, which expresses merely what is possible, by 
my thinking its object (through the expression 'it is') as given 
absolutely. Otherwise stated, the real contains no more than 
the merely possible. A hundred real thalers do not contain 
the least coin more than a hundred possible thalers. For as the 
latter signify the concept, and the former the object and the 
positing of the object, should the former contain more than the 
latter, my concept would not, in that case, express the whole 
object, and would not therefore be an adequate concept of it. 
My financial position is, however, affected very differently by 
a hundred real thalers than it is by the mere concept of them 
(that is, of their possibility). For the object, as it actually exists, 
is not analytically contained in my concept, but is added to my 
concept (which is a determination of my state) synthetically; 
and yet the conceived hundred thalers are not themselves in 
the least increased through thus acquiring existence outside 
my concept. 

By whatever and by however many predicates we may | B 62 g 
think a thing even if we completely determine it we do not 
make the least addition to the thing when we further declare 
that this thing is. Otherwise, it would not be exactly the same 
thing that exists, but something more than we had thought in 
the concept; and we could not, therefore, say that the exact 
object of my concept exists. If we think in a thing every feature 
of reality except one, 1 the missing reality is not added by my 
saying that this defective thing exists. On the contrary, it 
exists with the same defect with which I have thought it, since 
otherwise what exists would be something different from what 
I thought. When, therefore, -I think a being as the supreme 
reality, without any defect, the question still remains whether 

1 \alle Realitdt ausser einer.] 



506 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

it exists or not. For though, in my concept, nothing may be 
lacking of the possible real content of a thing in general, some- 
thing is still lacking in its relation to my whole state of thought, 
namely, [in so far as I am unable to assert] that knowledge of 
this object is also possible a posteriori. And here we find the 
source of our present difficulty. Were we dealing with an ob- 
ject of the senses, we could not confound the existence of the 
thing with the mere concept of it. For through the concept the 
object is thought only as conforming to the universal condi- 
tions of possible empirical knowledge in general, whereas 

B 620} though * ts existence it is thought as belonging to the context 
of experience as a whole. In being thus connected with the 
content of experience as a whole, the concept of the object is 
not, however, in the least enlarged; all that has happened is 
that our thought has thereby obtained an additional possible 
perception. It is not, therefore, surprising that, if we attempt 
to think existence through the pure category alone, we cannot 
specify a single mark distinguishing it from mere possibility. 
Whatever, therefore, and however much, our concept of an 
object may contain, we must go outside it, if we are to ascribe 
existence to the object. In the case of objects of the senses, this 
takes place through their connection with some one of our per- 
ceptions, in accordance with empirical laws. But in dealing 
with objects of pure thought, we have no means whatsoever 
of knowing their existence, since it would have to be known 
in a completely a priori manner. Our consciousness of all 
existence (whether immediately through perception, or medi- 
ately through inferences which connect something with per- 
ception) belongs exclusively to the unity of experience; any 
[alleged] existence outside this field, while not indeed such 
as we can declare to be absolutely impossible, is of the 
nature of an assumption which we can never be in a position 
to justify. 

The concept of a supreme being is in many respects a very 
useful idea; but just because it is a mere idea, it is altogether 
incapable, by itself alone, of enlarging our knowledge in re- 

B 630} arc * to wnat exists. It is not even competent to enlighten us 
as to the possibility of any existence beyond that which is 
known in and through experience. 1 The analytic criterion of 

1 \in Ansehung der Moglichkeit eines Mehreren.] 



IMPOSSIBILITY OF COSMOLOGICAL PROOF 507 

possibility, as consisting in the principle that bare positives 
(realities) give rise to no contradiction, cannot be denied to it. 
But since the realities are not given to us in their specific char- 
acters; since even if they were, we should still 1 not be in a posi- 
tion to pass judgment; since the criterion of the possibility of 
synthetic knowledge is never to be looked for save in ex- 
perience, to which the object of an idea cannot belong, 2 the 
connection of all real properties in a thing is a synthesis, the 
possibility of which we are unable to determine a priori. And 
thus the celebrated Leibniz is far from having succeeded in 
what he plumed himself on achieving the comprehension 
a priori of the possibility of this sublime ideal being. 

The attempt to establish the existence of a supreme being 
by means of the famous ontological argument of Descartes is 
therefore merely so much labour and effort lost; we can no 
more extend our stock of [theoretical] insight by mere ideas, 
than a merchant can better his position by adding a few 
noughts to his cash account. 



CHAPTER III 

\B6si 
Section 5 

THE IMPOSSIBILITY OF A COSMOLOGICAL PROOF OF 
THE EXISTENCE OF GOD 

To attempt to extract from a purely arbitrary idea the 
existence of an object corresponding to it is a quite unnatural 
procedure and a mere innovation of scholastic subtlety. Such 
an attempt would never have been made if there had not been 
antecedently, on the part of our reason, the need to assume as 
a basis of existence in general something necessary (in which 
our regress may terminate); and if, since this necessity must 
be unconditioned and certain a priori, reason had not, in con- 
sequence, been forced to seek a concept which would satisfy, if 
possible, such a demand, and enable us to know an existence 
in a completely a priori manner. Such a concept was supposed 
to have been found in the idea of an ens realissimum\ and that 

1 [Reading, with B, da aber for weil^aber.] 
8 [Reading, with Wille, stattf&amp;ndc for stattfinde.] 



508 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

idea was therefore used only for the more definite knowledge 
of that necessary being, of the necessary existence of which 
we were already convinced, or persuaded, on other grounds. 
This natural procedure of reason was, however, concealed 
from view, and instead of ending with this concept, the attempt 
was made to begin with it, and so to deduce from it that 
B 632} necess ity f existence which it was only fitted to supplement. 
Thus arose the unfortunate ontological proof, which yields 
satisfaction neither to the natural and healthy understanding 
nor to the more academic demands of strict proof. 

The cosmological proof y which we are now about to ex- 
amine, retains the connection of absolute necessity with the 
highest reality, but instead of reasoning, like the former proof, 
from the highest reality to necessity of existence, it reasons 
from the previously given unconditioned necessity of some 
being to the unlimited reality of that being. It thus enters upon 
a course of reasoning which, whether rational or only pseudo- 
rational, is at any rate natural, and the most convincing not 
only for common sense but even for speculative understand- 
ing. It also sketches the first outline of all the proofs in natural 
theology, an outline which has always been and always will 
be followed, however much embellished and disguised by 
superfluous additions. This proof, termed by Leibniz the proof 
a contingentia mundi, we shall now proceed to expound and 
examine. 

It runs thus: If anything exists, an absolutely necessary 
being must also exist. Now I, at least, exist. Therefore an 
absolutely necessary being exists. The minor premiss contains 
an experience, the major premiss the inference from there 
being any experience at all to the existence of the necessary . a 
The proof therefore really begins with experience, and is not 
wholly a priori or ontological. For this reason, and because 
the object of all possible experience is called the world, it is en- 
titled the cosmological proof. Since, in dealing with the objects 

a This inference is too well known to require detailed state- 
ment. It depends on the supposedly transcendental law of natural 
causality: that everything contingent has a cause, which, if itself 
contingent, must likewise have a cause, till the series of subordinate 
causes ends with an absolutely necessary cause, without which it 
would have no completeness. 



IMPOSSIBILITY OF COSMOLOGICAL PROOF 509 

of experience, the proof abstracts from all special properties 
through which this world may differ from any other possible 
world, the title also serves to distinguish it from the physico- 
theological proof, which is based upon observations of the par- 
ticular properties of the world disclosed to us by our senses. 

The proof then proceeds as follows: The necessary being 
can be determined in one way only, that is, by one out of each 
possible pair of opposed predicates. It must therefore be com- 
pletely determined through its own concept. Now there is only 
one possible concept which determines a thing completely 
a priori, namely, the concept of the ens realissimum. The 
concept of the ens realissimum is therefore the only concept (B 634 
through which a necessary being can be thought. In other 
words, a supreme being necessarily exists. 

In this cosmological argument there are combined so many 
pseudo-rational principles that speculative reason seems in 
this case to have brought to bear all the resources of its dia- 
lectical skill to produce the greatest possible transcendental 
illusion. The testing of the argument may meantime be post- 
poned while we detail in order the various devices whereby 
ari old argument is disguised as a new one, and by which 
appeal is made to the agreement of two witnesses, the one with 
credentials of pure reason and the other with those of experi- 
ence. In reality the only witness is that which speaks in the 
name of pure reason; in the endeavour to pass as a second 
witness it merely changes its dress and voice. In order to lay 
a secure foundation for itself, this proof takes its stand on 
experience, and thereby makes profession of being distinct 
from the ontological proof, which puts its entire trust in pure 
a priori concepts. But the cosmological proof uses this experi- 
ence only for a single step in the argument, namely, to con- 
clude the existence of a necessary being. What properties this 
being may have, the empirical premiss cannot tell us. Reason 
therefore abandons experience altogether, and endeavours to 
discover from mere concepts what properties an absolutely 
necessary being must have, that is, which among all possible 
things contains in itself the conditions (requisitd) essential to 
absolute necessity. Now these, it is supposed, are nowhere to 
be found save in the concept of an ens realisjimum\ and the 
conclusion is therefore drawn, that the ens realissimum is the 



5io KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

absolutely necessary being. But it is evident that we are here 
presupposing that the concept of the highest reality is com- 
pletely adequate to the concept of absolute necessity of existence; 
that is, that the latter can be inferred from the former. Now 
this is the proposition maintained by the ontological proof; it 
is here being assumed in the cosmological proof, and indeed 
made the basis of the proof; and yet it is an assumption with 
which this latter proof has professed to dispense. For ab- 
solute necessity is an existence determined from mere con- 
cepts. If I say, the concept of the ens realissimum is a con- 
cept, and indeed the only concept, which is appropriate and 
adequate to necessary existence, I must also admit that neces- 
sary existence can be inferred from this concept. Thus the so- 
called cosmological proof really owes any cogency which it 
may have to the ontological proof from mere concepts. The 
appeal to experience is quite superfluous; experience may per- 
haps lead us to the concept of absolute necessity, but is unable 
to demonstrate this necessity as belonging to any determinate 
thing. For immediately we endeavour to do so, we must 
abandon all experience and search among pure concepts 
to discover whether any one of them contains the condi- 
B 6 6 j tions of the possibility of an absolutely necessary being. If 
in this way we can determine the possibility of a necessary 
being, we likewise establish its existence. For what we are 
then saying is this: that of all possible beings there is one 
which carries with it absolute necessity, that is, that this being 
exists with absolute necessity. 

Fallacious and misleading arguments are most easily 
detected if set out in correct syllogistic form. This we now 
proceed to do in the instance under discussion. 

If the proposition, that every absolutely necessary being is 
likewise the most real of all beings, is correct (and this is the 
nervus probandi of the cosmological proof), it must, like all 
affirmative judgments, be convertible, at least per accidens. 
It therefore follows that some entia realissima are likewise 
absolutely necessary beings. But one ens realissimum is in no 
respect different from another, and what is true of some under 
this concept is true also of all. In this case, therefore, I can 
convert the proposition simpliciter y not only per accidens^ 
and say that every ens realissimum is a necessary being. But 






IMPOSSIBILITY OF COSMOLOGICAL PROOF 511 

since this proposition is determined from its 1 a priori concepts 
alone, the mere concept 'of the ens realissimum must carry 
with it the absolute necessity of that being; and this is precisely 
what the ontological proof has asserted and what the cosmo- 
logical proof has refused to admit, although the conclusions {3 
of the latter are indeed covertly based on it. 

Thus the second path upon which speculative reason enters 
in its attempt to prove the existence of a supreme being is not 
only as deceptive as the first, but has this additional defect, 
that it is guilty of an ignoratio elenchi. It professes to lead 
us by a new path, but after a short circuit brings us back to 
the very path which we had deserted at its bidding. 

I have stated that in this cosmological argument there lies 
hidden a whole nest of dialectical assumptions, which the 
transcendental critique can easily detect and destroy. These 
deceptive principles I shall merely enumerate, leaving to the 
reader, who by this time will be sufficiently expert in these 
matters, the task of investigating them further, and of re- 
futing them. 

We find, for instance, (i) the transcendental principle 
whereby from the contingent we infer a cause. This principle 
is applicable only in the sensible world; outside that world it 
has no meaning whatsoever. For the mere intellectual concept 
of the contingent cannot give rise to any synthetic proposition, 
such as that of causality. The principle of causality has no 
meaning and no criterion for its application save only in the 
sensible world. But in the cosmological proof it is precisely in 
order to enable us to advance beyond the sensible world that 
it is employed. (2) The inference to a first cause, from the im- {g 
possibility of an infinite series of causes, given one after the 
other, in the sensible world. The principles of the employment 
of reason do not justify this conclusion even within the world 
of experience, still less beyond this world in a realm into 
which this series can never be extended. (3) The unjustified 
self-satisfaction of reason in respect of the completion of this 
series. The removal of all the conditions without which no 
concept of necessity is possible is taken by reason to be a com- 
pletion of the concept of the series, on the ground that we can 
then conceive nothing further. (4) The confusion between the 

1 [Erdmann would read reinen in place of seznen.] 



512 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

logical possibility of a concept of all reality united into one 
(without inner contradiction) and the transcendental possi- 
bility of such a reality. In the case of the latter there is 
needed a principle to establish the practicability of such a 
synthesis, a principle which itself, however, can apply only 
to the field of possible experiences etc. 

The procedure of the cosmological proof is artfully designed 
to enable us to escape having to prove the existence of a neces- 
sary being a priori through mere concepts. Such proof would 
require to be carried out in the ontological manner, and that 
is an enterprise for which we feel ourselves to be altogether in- 
competent, Accordingly, we take as the starting-point of our 
inference an actual existence (an experience in general), andad- 
vence, in such manner as we can, to some absolutely necessary 
condition of this existence. We have then no need to show the 

3 g 11 } possibility of this condition. For if it has been proved to exist, 
the question as to its possibility is entirely superfluous. If now 
we want to determine more fully the nature of this necessary 
being, we do not endeavour to do so in the manner that would 
be really adequate, namely, by discovering from its concept the 
necessity of its existence. For could we do that, we should oe 
in no need of an empirical starting-point. No, all we seek is 
the negative condition (conditio sine qua non), without which a 
being would not be absolutely necessary. And in all other kinds 
of reasoning from a given consequence to its ground this would 
be legitimate; but in the present case it unfortunately happens 
that the condition which is needed for absolute necessity is only 
to be found in one single being. This being must therefore 
contain in its concept all that is required for absolute necessity, 
and consequently it enables me to infer this absolute necessity 
a priori. I must therefore be able also to reverse the inference, 
and to say: Anything to which this concept (of supreme reality) 
applies is absolutely necessary. If I cannot make this inference 
(as I must concede, if I am to avoid admitting the ontological 
proof), I have come to grief in the new way that I have been 
following, and am back again at my starting-point. The con- 
cept of the supreme being satisfies all questions a priori which 
can be raised regarding the inner determinations of a thing, 

A *? I2 \ and is therefore a/i ideal that is quite unique, in that the con- 
cept, while universal, also at the same time designates an 



IMPOSSIBILITY OF COSMOLOGICAL PROOFS 513 

individual as being among the things that are possible. But it 
does not give satisfaction concerning the question of its own 
existence though this is the real purpose of our enquiries 
and if anyone admitted the existence of a necessary being but 
wanted to know which among all [existing] things is to be 
identified with that being, we could not answer: "This, not 
that, is the necessary being." 

We may indeed be allowed to postulate the existence of an 
all-sufficient being, as the cause of all possible effects, with a 
view to lightening the task of reason in its search for the unity 
of the grounds of explanation. But in presuming so far as to 
say that such a being necessarily exists, we are no longer 
giving modest expression to an admissible hypothesis, but 
are confidently laying claim to apodeictic certainty. For the 
knowledge of what we profess to know as absolutely necessary 
must itself carry with it absolute necessity. 

The whole problem of the transcendental ideal amounts to 
this: either, given absolute necessity, to find a concept which 
possesses it, or, given the concept of something, to find that 
something to be absolutely necessary. If either task be possible, 
so must the other; for reason recognises that only as absolutely 
necessary which follows of necessity from its concept. But both 
tasks are quite beyond our utmost efforts to satisfy our under- (3 
standing in this matter; and equally unavailing are all attempts 
to induce it to acquiesce in its incapacity. 

Unconditioned necessity, which we so indispensably re- 
quire as the last bearer of all things, is for human reason the 
veritable abyss. Eternity itself, in all its terrible sublimity, as 
depicted byaHaller, 1 is far from making the same overwhelm- 
ing impression on the mind; for it only measures the duration 
of things, it does not support them. We cannot put aside, and 
yet also cannot endure the thought, that a being, which we 
represent to ourselves as supreme amongst all possible beings, 
should, as it were, say to itself: 'I am from eternity to eternity, 
and outside me there is nothing save what is through my will,' 
but whence then am /?' All support here fails us; and the 
greatest perfection, no less than the least perfection, is unsub- 
stantial and baseless for the merely speculative reason, which 

1 [Albrecht von Haller (1708- 1777), a writer on media*! and kindred subjects, 
author of Die Alpen and other poems.] 

2 L 



5H KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

makes not the least effort to retain either the one or the other, 
and feels indeed no loss in allowing them to vanish entirely. 

Many forces in nature, which manifest their existence 
through certain effects, remain for us inscrutable; for we cannot 
track them sufficiently far by observation. Also, the transcend- 
ental object lying at the basis of appearances (and with it the 
reason why our sensibility is subject to certain supreme con- 
B 642} ditions rather than to others) is and remains for us inscrutable. 
The thing itself 1 is indeed given, but we can have no insight 
into its nature. But it is quite otherwise with an ideal of pure 
reason; it can never be said to be inscrutable. For since it is 
not required to give any credentials of its reality save only 
the need on the part of reason to complete all synthetic unity 
by means of it; and since, therefore, it is in no wise given as 
thinkable object, it cannot be inscrutable in the manner in 
which an object is. On the contrary it 2 must, as a mere idea, 
find its place and its solution in the nature of reason, and 
must therefore allow of investigation. For it is of the very 
essence of reason that we should be able to give an account 
of all our concepts, opinions, and assertions, either upon 
objective or, in the case of mere illusion, upon subjective 
grounds. 



DISCOVERY AND EXPLANATION 

of the Dialectical Illusion in all Transcendental Proofs of the Existence of 
a Necessary Being 

Both the above proofs were transcendental, that is, were 
attempted independently of empirical principles. For although 
the cosmological proof presupposes an experience in general, 
it is not based on any particular property of this experience 
but on pure principles of reason, as applied to an existence 
B 643} gi ven through empirical consciousness in general. Further, it 
soon abandons this guidance and relies on pure concepts alone. 
What, then, in these transcendental proofs is the cause of the 
dialectical but natural illusion which connects the concepts of 
necessity and supreme reality, and which realises and hypos- 
tatises what can be an idea only? Why are we constrained 
to assume that some one among existing things is in itself 
1 [dit Saehe selbst.] 2 [Reading, with Hartenstein, es for er.] 



ILLUSION IN TRANSCENDENTAL PROOFS 515 

necessary, and yet at the same time to shrink back from the 
existence of such a being as from an abyss? And how are 
we to secure that reason may come to an agreement with 
itself in this matter, and that from the wavering condition of 
a diffident approval, ever again withdrawn, it may arrive at 
settled insight? 

There is something very strange in the fact, that once we 
assume something to exist we cannot avoid inferring that 
something exists necessarily. The cosmological argument rests 
on this quite natural (although not therefore certain) infer- 
ence. On the other hand, if I take the concept of anything, no 
matter what, I find that the existence of this thing can never 
be represented by me as absolutely necessary, and that, what- 
ever it may be that exists, nothing prevents me from think- 
ing its non-existence. Thus while I may indeed be obliged to 
assume something necessary as a condition of the existent in 
general, I cannot think any particular thing as in itself neces- 
sary. In other words, I can never complete the regress to the |g $44 
conditions of existence save by assuming a necessary being, 
and yet am never in a position to begin with such a being. 

If I am constrained to think something necessary as a 
condition of existing things, but am unable to think any 
particular thing as in itself necessary, it inevitably follows that 
necessity and contingency do not concern the things them- 
selves; otherwise there would be a contradiction. Conse- 
quently, neither of these two principles can be objective. They 
may, however, be regarded as subjective principles of reason. 
The one calls upon us to seek something necessary as a con- 
dition of all that is given as existent, that is, to stop nowhere 
until we have arrived at an explanation which is complete 
a priori\ the other forbids us ever to hope for this completion, 
that is, forbids us to treat anything empirical as uncondi- 
tioned and to exempt ourselves thereby from the toil of its 
further derivation. Viewed in this manner, the two principles, 
as merely heuristic and regulative^ and as concerning only the 
formal interest of reason, can very well stand side by side. The 
one prescribes that we are to philosophise about nature as if 
there were a necessary first ground for all that belongs to 
existence solely, however, for the purpose of bringing sys- 
tematic unity into our knowledge, by always pursuing such 



Si6 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

an idea, as an imagined ultimate ground. The other warns us 
g 6*e j n t to regard any determination whatsoever of existing things 
as such an ultimate ground, that is, as absolutely necessary, 
but to keep the way always open for further derivation, and 
so to treat each and every determination as always condi- 
tioned by something else. But if everything which is perceived 
in things must necessarily be treated by us as conditioned, 
nothing that allows of being empirically given can be re- 
garded as absolutely necessary. 

Since, therefore, the absolutely necessary is only intended 
to serve as a principle for obtaining the greatest possible 
unity among appearances, as being their ultimate ground; 
and since inasmuch as the second rule commands us al- 
ways to regard all empirical causes of unity as themselves 
derived we can never reach this unity within the world, it 
follows that we must regard the absolutely necessary as being 
outside the world. 

While the philosophers of antiquity regard all form in 
nature as contingent, they follow the judgment of the common 
man in their view of matter as original and necessary. But if, 
instead of regarding matter relatively, as substratum of ap- 
pearances, they had considered it in itself, and as regards its 
existence, the idea of absolute necessity would at once have 
disappeared. For there is nothing which absolutely binds 
reason to accept such an existence; on the contrary it can al- 
ways annihilate it in thought, without contradiction; absolute 
necessity is a necessity that is to be found in thought alone. 
6645} This belief must therefore have been due to a certain regu- 
lative principle. In fact extension and impenetrability (which 
between them make up the concept of matter) constitute the 
supreme empirical principle 1 of the unity of appearances; 
and this principle, so far as it is empirically unconditioned, 
has the character of a regulative principle. Nevertheless, 
since every determination of the matter which constitutes what 
is real in appearances, including impenetrability, is an effect 
(action) which must have its cause and which is therefore 
always derivative in character, matter is not compatible with 
the idea of a necessary being as a principle of all derived unity. 
(For its real properties, being derivative, are one and all only 

1 \Prinzipium. Kant's more usual term is Prinzip.] 



ILLUSION IN TRANSCENDENTAL PROOFS 517 

conditionally necessary, and so allow of being removed 
wherewith the whole existence of matter would be removed.) 
If this were not the case, we should have reached the ulti- 
mate ground of unity by empirical means which is for- 
bidden by the second regulative principle. It therefore follows 
that matter, and in general whatever belongs to the world, 
is not compatible with the idea of a necessary original being, 
even when the latter is regarded simply as a principle of the 
greatest empirical unity. That being or principle must be set 
outside the world, leaving us free to derive the appearances 
of the world and their existence from other appearances, with 
unfailing confidence, just as if there were no necessary being, 
while yet we are also free to strive unceasingly towards the 
completeness of that derivation, just as if such a being were 
presupposed as an ultimate ground. 

As follows from these considerations, the ideal of the 
supreme being is nothing but a regulative principle of reason, 
which directs us to look upon all connection in the world as if 
it originated from an all-sufficient necessary cause. We can 
base upon the ideal the rule of a systematic and, in accord- 
adce with universal laws, necessary unity in the explanation 
of that connection; but the ideal is not an assertion of an 
existence necessary in itself. At the same time we cannot avoid 
the transcendental subreption, by which this formal principle 
is represented as constitutive, and by which this unity is hypos- 
tatised. We proceed here just as we do in the case of space. 
Space is only a principle 1 of sensibility, but since it is the 
primary source and condition of all shapes, which are only so 
many limitations of itself, it is taken as something absolutely 
necessary, existing in its own right, and as an object given a 
priori in itself. In the same way, since the systematic unity of 
nature cannot be prescribed as a principle for the empirical 
employment of our reason, except in so far as we presuppose 
the idea of an ens realissimum as the supreme cause, it is 
quite natural that this latter idea should be represented as an 
actual object, which, in its character of supreme condition, is 
also necessary thus changing a regulative into a constitutive |g *?* 
principle. That such a substitution has been made becomes 
evident, when we consider this supreme being^ which relatively 

1 [Pringipium.] 



Si8 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

to the world is absolutely (unconditionally) necessary, as a 
thing in and by itself. For we are then unable to conceive 
what can be meant by its necessity. The concept of necessity 
is only to be found in our reason, as a formal condition of 
thought; it does not allow of being hypostatised as a material 
condition of existence. 



CHAPTER III 

Section 6 
THE IMPOSSIBILITY OF THE PHYSICO-THEOLOGICAL PROOF 

If, then, neither the concept of things in general nor the 
experience of any existence in general can supply what is re- 
quired, it remains only to try whether a determinate experience, 
the experience of the things of the present world, and the con- 
stitution and order of these, does not provide the basis of a 
proof which may help us to attain to an assured conviction of a 
supreme being. Such proof we propose to entitle \hzphysico- 
theological. Should this attempt also fail, it must follow that 
no satisfactory proof of the existence of a being corresponding 
to our transcendental idea can be possible by pure speculative 
reason. 

B 640} * n v * ew ^ wnat nas already been said, it is evident that we 
can count upon a quite easy and conclusive answer to this 
enquiry. For how can any experience ever be adequate to an 
idea? The peculiar nature of the latter consists just in the fact 
that no experience can ever be equal to it. The transcendental 
idea of a necessary and all-sufficient original being is so 
overwhelmingly great, so high above everything empirical, 
the latter being always conditioned, that it leaves us at a 
loss, partly because we can never find in experience material 
sufficient to satisfy such a concept, and partly because it is 
always in the sphere of the conditioned that we carry out our 
search, seeking there ever vainly for the unconditioned no 
law of any empirical synthesis giving us an example of any 
such unconditioned or providing the least guidance in its 
pursuit. t 

If the supreme being should itself stand in this chain of 



PHYSICO-THEOLOGICAL PROOF IMPOSSIBLE 519 

conditions, it would be a member of the series, and like the 
lower members which it precedes, would call for further en- 
quiry as to the still higher ground from which it follows. If, on 
the other hand, we propose to separate it from the chain, and 
to conceive it as a purely intelligible being, existing apart from 
the series of natural causes, by what bridge can reason contrive 
to pass over to it? For all laws governing the transition from 
effects to causes, all synthesis and extension of our knowledge, 
refer to nothing but possible experience, and therefore solely 

to objects of the sensible world, and apart from them can have 

. . IB 050 

no meaning whatsoever. 

This world presents to us so immeasurable a stage of 
variety, order, purposiveness, and beauty, as displayed alike in 
its infinite extent and in the unlimited divisibility of its parts, 
that even with such knowledge as our weak understanding 
can acquire of it, we are brought face to face with so many 
marvels immeasurably great, that all speech loses its force, all 
numbers their power to measure, our thoughts themselves all 
definiteness, and that our judgment of the whole resolves itself 
into an amazement which is speechless, and only the more elo- 
quent on that account. Everywhere we see a chain of effects 
and causes, of ends and means, a regularity in origination and 
dissolution. Nothing has of itself come into the condition in 
which we find it to exist, but always points to something 
else as its cause, while this in turn commits us to repetition 
of the same enquiry. The whole universe must thus sink into 
the abyss of nothingness, unless, over and above this infinite 
chain of contingencies, we assume something to support it 
something which is original and independently self-subsistent, 
and which as the cause of the origin of the universe secures 
also at the same time its continuance. What magnitude are we 
to ascribe to this supreme cause admitting that it is supreme 
in respect of all things in the world? We are not acquainted 
with the whole content of the world, still less do we know 
how to estimate its magnitude by comparison with all that is 
possible. But since we cannot, as regards causality, dispense 
with an ultimate and supreme being, 1 what is there to pre- 
vent us ascribing to it a degree of perfection that sets it above 
everything else that is possible! This we can easily do though 

1 \ein ausserstes und oberstes 



520 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

only through the slender outline of an abstract concept by 
representing this being to ourselves as combining in itself all 
possible perfection, as in a single substance. This concept is 
in conformity with the demand of our reason for parsimony 
of principles; it is free from self-contradiction, and is never 
decisively contradicted by any experience; and it is likewise 
of such a character that it contributes to the extension of 
the employment of reason within experience, through the 
guidance which it yields in the discovery of order and 
purposiveness. 

This proof always deserves to be mentioned with respect. 
It is the oldest, the clearest, and the best suited to ordinary 
human reason. It enlivens the study of nature, just as it itself 
derives its existence and gains ever new vigour from that 
source. It suggests ends and purposes, where our observation 
would not have detected them by itself, and extends our 
knowledge of nature by means of the guiding-concept of a 
special unity, the principle of which is outside nature. This 
knowledge again reacts on its cause, namely, upon the idea 
B 652} w hich nas led to it, and so strengthens the belief in a supreme 
Author [of nature] that the belief acquires the force of an irre- 
sistible conviction. 

It would therefore not only be uncomforting but utterly 
vain to attempt to diminish in any way the authority of this 
argument. Reason, constantly upheld by this ever-increasing 
evidence, which, though empirical, is yet so powerful, can- 
not be so depressed through doubts suggested by subtle and 
abstruse speculation, that it is not at once aroused from the 
indecision of all melancholy reflection, as from a dream, by 
one glance at the wonders of nature and the majesty of the 
universe ascending from height to height up to the all- 
highest, from the conditioned to its conditions, up to the 
supreme and unconditioned Author [of all conditioned 
being]. 

But although we have nothing to bring against the ration- 
ality and utility of this procedure, but have rather to commend 
and to further it, we still cannot approve the claims, which this 
mode of argument would fain advance, to apodeictic certainty 
and to an assent founded on no special favour or support from 
other quarters. It cannot hurt the good cause, if the dogmatic 



PHYSICO-THEOLOGICAL PROOF IMPOSSIBLE 521 

language of the overweening sophist be toned down to the | B 
more moderate and humble requirements of a belief adequate 
to quieten our doubts, though not to command unconditional 
submission. I therefore maintain that the physico-theological 
proof can never by itself establish the existence of a supreme 
being, but must always fall back upon the ontological argu- 
ment to make good its deficiency. It only serves as an intro- 
duction to the ontological argument; and the latter therefore 
contains (in so far as a speculative proof is possible at all) the 
one possible ground of proof with which human reason can 
never dispense. 1 

The chief points of the physico-theological proof are as 
follows: (i) In the world we everywhere find clear signs of an 
order in accordance with a determinate purpose, carried out 
with great wisdom; and this in a universe which is indescrib- 
ably varied in content and unlimited in extent. (2) This pur- 
posive order is quite alien to the things of the world, and only 
belongs to them contingently; that is to say, the diverse things 
could not of themselves have co-operated, by so great a com- 
bination of diverse means, to the fulfilment of determinate 
final purposes, had they not been chosen and designed for 
these purposes by an ordering rational principle in conformity 
with underlying ideas. (3) There exists, therefore, a sublime 
and wise cause (or more than one), which must be the cause 
of the world not merely as a blindly working all-powerful 
nature, by fecundity ', but as intelligence, through freedom. 
(4) The unity of this cause may be inferred from the unity of 
the reciprocal relations existing between the parts of the world, 
as members of an artfully arranged structure inferred with {g 
certainty in so far as our observation suffices for its verification, 
and beyond these limits with probability, in accordance with 
the principles of analogy. 

We need not here criticise natural reason too strictly in 
regard to its conclusion from the analogy between certain 
natural products and what our human art produces when we 
do violence to nature, and constrain it to proceed not according 
to its own ends but in conformity with ours appealing to the 
similarity of these particular natural products with houses, 

ships, watches. Nor need we here question its conclusion that 



1 \vorbeigehen.} 



522 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

there lies at the basis of nature a causality similar to that 
responsible for artificial products, namely, an understand- 
ing and a will; and that the inner possibility of a self-acting 1 
nature (which is what makes all art, and even, it may be, 
reason itself, possible) is therefore derived from another, 
though superhuman, art a mode of reasoning which could 
not perhaps withstand a searching transcendental criticism. 
But at any rate we must admit that, if we are to specify a 
cause at all, we cannot here proceed more securely than by 
analogy with those purposive productions of which alone the 
cause and mode of action are fully known to us. Reason could 
never be justified in abandoning the causality which it knows 
for grounds of explanation which are obscure, of which it 
does not have any knowledge, and which are incapable of 
proof. 

On this method of argument, the purposiveness and har- 
monious adaptation of so much in nature can suffice to prove 
g 6 ??| the contingency of the form merely, not of the matter, that is, 
not of the substance in the world. To prove the latter we should 
have to demonstrate that the things in the world would not 
of themselves be capable of such order and harmony, ih 
accordance with universal laws, if they were not in their 
substance the product of supreme wisdom. But to prove this 
we should require quite other grounds of proof than those 
which are derived from the analogy with human art. The 
utmost, therefore, that the argument can prove is an architect 
of the world who is always very much hampered by the 
adaptability of the material in which he works, not a creator 
of the world to whose idea everything is subject. This, how- 
ever, is altogether inadequate to the lofty purpose which we 
have before our eyes, namely, the proof of an all-sufficient 
primordial being. To prove the contingency of matter itself, 
we should have to resort to a transcendental argument, and 
this is precisely what we have here set out to avoid. 

The inference, therefore, is that the order and purposive- 
ness everywhere observable throughout the world may be 
regarded as a completely contingent arrangement, and that 
we may argue to the existence of a cause proportioned to it. 
But the concept df this cause must enable us to know some- 

1 [freiwirkenden.] 



PHYSICO-THEOLOGICAL PROOF IMPOSSIBLE 523 

thing quite determinate about it, and can therefore be no 
other than the concept of a being who possesses all might, 
wisdom, etc., in a word, all the perfection which is proper to 
an all-sufficient being. For the predicates 'very great', 'as- 
founding', 'immeasurable' in power and excellence give no 
determinate concept at all, and do not really tell us what the 
thing is in itself. They are only relative representations of the 
magnitude of the object, which the observer, in contemplat- 
ing the world, compares with himself and with his capacity 
of comprehension, and which are equally terms of eulogy 
whether we be magnifying the object or be depreciating the 
observing subject in relation to that object. Where we are 
concerned with the magnitude (of the perfection) of a thing, 
there is no determinate concept except that which compre- 
hends all possible perfection; and in that concept only the 
allness (pmnitudo) of the reality is completely determined. 

Now no one, I trust, will be so bold as to profess that he 
comprehends the relation of the magnitude of the world as he 
has observed it (alike as regards both extent and content) to 
omnipotence, of the world order to supreme wisdom, of the 
world unity to the absolute unity of its Author, etc. Physico- 
theology is therefore unable to give any determinate concept 
of the supreme cause of the world, and cannot therefore serve 
as the foundation of a theology which is itself in turn to 
form the basis of religion. 

To advance to absolute totality by the empirical road is 
utterly impossible. None the less this is what is attempted in 
the physico-theological proof. What, then, are the means |g 
which have been adopted to bridge this wide abyss? 

The physico-theological argument can indeed lead us to 
the point of admiring the greatness, wisdom, power, etc., of 
the Author of the world, but can take us no further. Accord- 
ingly, we then abandon the argument from empirical grounds 
of proof, and fall back upon the contingency which, in the 
first steps of the argument, we had inferred from the order and 
purposiveness of the world. With this contingency as our sole 
premiss, we then advance, by means of transcendental con- 
cepts alone, to the existence of an absolutely necessary being, 
and [as a final step] from the concept of the 'absolute necessity 
of the first cause to the completely determinate or determin- 



524 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

able concept of that necessary being, namely, to the concept of 
an all-embracing reality. Thus the physico-theological proof, 
failing in its undertaking, has in face of this difficulty suddenly 
fallen back upon the cosmological proof; and since the latter 
is only a disguised ontological proof, it has really achieved 
its purpose by pure reason alone although at the start it 
disclaimed all kinship with pure reason and professed to 
establish its conclusions on convincing evidence derived from 
experience. 

Those who propound the physico-theological argument 
have therefore no ground for being so contemptuous in their 
attitude to the transcendental mode of proof, posing as clear- 
sighted students of nature, and complacently looking down 
upon that proof as the artificial product of obscure speculative 
refinements. For were they willing to scrutinise their own pro- 
cedure, they would find that, after advancing some considerable 
B 653} wav on *ke sou d ground of nature and experience, and finding 
themselves just as far distant as ever from the object which dis- 
closes itself to their reason, they suddenly leave this ground, and 
pass over into the realm of mere possibilities, where they hope 
upon the wings of ideas to draw near to the object the object 
that has refused itself to all their empirical enquiries. For after 
this tremendous leap, when they have, as they think, found firm 
ground, they extend their concept the determinate concept, 
into the possession of which they have now come, they know not 
how over the whole sphere of creation. And the ideal, [which 
this reasoning thus involves, and] which is entirely a product 
of pure reason, they then elucidate by reference to experience, 
though inadequately enough, and in a manner far below the 
dignity of its object; and throughout they persist in refusing 
to admit that they have arrived at this knowledge or hypo- 
thesis by a road quite other than that of experience. 

Thus the physico-theological proof of the existence of an 
original or supreme being rests upon the cosmological proof, 
and the cosmological upon the ontological. And since, besides 
these three, there is no other path open to speculative reason, 
the ontological proof from pure concepts of reason is the only 
possible one, if indeed any proof of a proposition so far exalted 
above all empirical employment of the understanding is pos- 
sible at all. 



CRITIQUE OF ALL THEOLOGY 525 

CHAPTER III {5559 

Section 7 

CRITIQUE OF ALL THEOLOGY BASED UPON SPECULATIVE 
PRINCIPLES OF REASON 

If I understand by theology knowledge of the original 
being, it is based either solely upon reason (theologia rationa- 
Us) or upon revelation (revelata). The former thinks its object 
either through pure reason, solely by means of transcendental 
concepts (ens originarium, realissimum, ens entiuni), in which 
case it is entitled transcendental theology, or through a con- 
cept borrowed from nature (from the nature of our soul) a 
concept of the original being as a supreme intelligence and 
it would then have to be called natural theology. Those who 
accept only a transcendental theology are called deists\ those 
who also admit a natural theology are called theists. The 
former grant that we can know the existence of an original 
being solely through reason, but maintain that our concept 
of it is transcendental only, namely, the concept of a being 
which possesses all reality, but which we are unable to de- 
termine in any more specific fashion. The latter assert that 
reason is capable of determining its object more precisely 
through analogy with nature, namely, as a being which, 
through understanding and freedom, contains in itself the 
ultimate ground of everything else. Thus the deist repre- 
sents this being merely as a cause of the world (whether by | B ^ 
the necessity of its nature or through freedom, remains un- 
decided), the theist as the Author of the world. 

Transcendental theology, again, either proposes to deduce 
the existence of the original being from an experience in 
general (without determining in any more specific fashion the 
nature of the world to which the experience belongs), and is 
then entitled cosmo-theology\ or it believes that it can know the 
existence of such a being through mere concepts, without the 
help of any experience whatsoever, and is then entitled onto- 
theology. 

Natural theology infers the properties arid the existence of 



526 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

an Author of the world from the constitution, the order and 
unity, exhibited in the world a world in which we have to 
recognise two kinds of causality with their rules, namely, 
nature and freedom. From this world natural theology ascends 
to a supreme intelligence, as the principle either of all natural 
or of all moral order and perfection. In the former case it is 
entitled physico-theology, in the latter moral theology. " 

Since we are wont to understand by the concept of God not 
merely an eternal nature that works blindly, as the root-source 
of all things, but a supreme being who through understanding 

g ^| and freedom is the Author of all things; and since it is in this 
sense only that the concept interests us, we could, strictly 
speaking, deny to the deist any belief in God, allowing him 
only the assertion of an original being or supreme cause. How- 
ever, since no one ought to be accused of denying what he only 
does not venture to assert, it is less harsh and more just to 
say that the deist believes in a God, the theist in a living God 
(summa intelligentid). We shall now proceed to enquire what 
are the possible sources of all these endeavours of reason. 

For the purposes of this enquiry, theoretical knowledge 
may be defined as knowledge of what is, practical knowledge 
as the representation of what ought to be. On this definition, the 
theoretical employment of reason is that by which I know a 
priori (as necessary) that something is, and the practical that 
by which it is known a priori what ought to happen. Now if it 
is indubitably certain that something is or that something 
ought to happen, but this certainty is at the same time only 
conditional, then a certain determinate condition of it can be 
absolutely necessary, or can be an optional and contingent 
presupposition. In the former case the condition is postulated 
(per thesin)\ in the latter case it is assumed (per hypothesin). 
Now since there are practical laws which are absolutely neces- 

B 662} sar Y&gt; th at * s &gt; t ^ le mora l l aws &gt; it must follow that if these neces- 
sarily presuppose the existence of any being as the condition of 

Not theological ethics: for this contains moral laws, which/r^- 
suppose the existence of a supreme ruler of the world. Moral theology, 
on the other hand, is a conviction of the existence of a supreme being 
a conviction which bases itself on moral laws. 1 

1 [welche sich auf fittliche Gesetze grundet substituted in B for welche auf 
sittliche Gesetze gegriindet ist.] 



CRITIQUE OF ALL THEOLOGY 527 

the possibility of their obligatory power, this existence must 
be postulated', and this for the sufficient reason that the condi- 
tioned, from which the inference is drawn to this determinate 
condition, is itself known a priori to be absolutely necessary. 
At some future time we shall show that the moral laws do 
not merely presuppose the existence of a supreme being, but 
also, as themselves in a different connection absolutely neces- 
sary, justify us in postulating it, though, indeed, only from 
a practical point of view. For the present, however, we are 
leaving this mode of argument aside. 

Where we are dealing merely with what is (not with what 
ought to be), the conditioned, which is given to us in experi- 
ence, is always thought as being likewise contingent. That 
which conditions it is not, therefore, known as absolutely 
necessary, but serves only as something relatively necessary 
or rather as needful', in itself and a priori it is an arbitrary 
presupposition, assumed by us in our attempt to know the 
conditioned by means of reason. If, therefore, in the field of 
theoretical knowledge, the absolute necessity of a thing were 
to be known, this could only be from a priori concepts, and 
never by positing it as a cause relative to an existence given 
in experience. 

Theoretical knowledge is speculative if it concerns an ob- 
ject, or those concepts of an object, which cannot be reached 
in any experience. It is so named to distinguish it from the | 
knowledge of nature, which concerns only those objects or pre- 
dicates of objects which can be given in a possible experience. 

The principle by which, from that which happens (the em- 
pirically contingent) [viewed] as [an] effect, we infer a cause, 
is a principle of the knowledge of nature, but not of specula- 
tive knowedge. For, if we abstract from what it is as a principle 
that contains the condition of all possible experience, and leav- 
ing aside all that is empirical attempt to assert it of the con- 
tingent in general, there remains not the least justification for 
any synthetic proposition such as might show us how to pass 
from that which is before us to something quite different 
(called its cause). In this merely speculative employment any 
meaning whose objective reality admits of being made intelli- 
gible in concrete, is taken away not only from the concept of 
the contingent but from the concept of a cause. 



528 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

If we infer from the existence of things in the world the 
existence of their cause, we are employing reason, not in the 
knowledge of nature, but in speculation. For the former type 
of knowledge treats as empirically contingent, and refers to a 
cause, not the things themselves (substances), but only that 
which happens, that is, their states. That substance (matter) is 
itself contingent in its existence would have to be known in a 

B 664} P ure ty speculative manner. Again, even if we were speaking 
only of the form of the world, the way in which things are con- 
nected and change, and sought to infer from this a cause 
entirely distinct from the world, this would again be a judg- 
ment of purely speculative reason, since the object which we 
are inferring is not an object of a possible experience. So em- 
ployed, the principle of causality, which is only valid within 
the field of experience, and outside this field has no applica- 
tion, nay, is indeed meaningless, would be altogether diverted 
from its proper use. 

Now I maintain that all attempts to employ reason in theo- 
logy in any merely speculative manner are altogether fruit- 
less and by their very nature null and void, and that the prin- 
ciples of its employment in the study of nature do not lead to 
any theology whatsoever. Consequently, the only theology of 
reason which is possible is that which is based upon moral laws 
or seeks guidance from them. All synthetic principles of reason 
allow only of an immanent employment; and in order to have 
knowledge of a supreme being we should have to put them to 
a transcendent use, for which our understanding is in no way 
fitted. If the empirically valid law of causality is to lead to the 
original being, the latter must belong to the chain of objects of 
experience, and in that case it would, like all appearances, be 

B 665} * tse ^ a g a i n conditioned. But even if the leap beyond the limits 
of experience, by means of the dynamical law of the relation of 
effects to their causes, be regarded as permissible, what sort of 
a concept could we obtain by this procedure? It is far from pro- 
viding the concept of a supreme being, since experience never 
gives us the greatest of all possible effects, such as would be re- 
quired to provide the evidence for a cause of that kind. Should 
we seek to make good this lack of determination in our concept, 
by means of a mere idea of [a being that possesses] the highest 
perfection and original necessity, this may indeed be granted 



CRITIQUE OF ALL THEOLOGY 529 

as a favour; it cannot be demanded as a right on the strength 
of an incontrovertible proof. The physico-theological proof, as 
combining speculation and intuition, might therefore perhaps 
give additional weight to other proofs (if such there be); but 
taken alone, it serves only to prepare the understanding for 
theological knowledge, and to give it a natural leaning in this 
direction, not to complete the work in and by itself. 

All this clearly points to the conclusion that transcendental 
questions allow only of transcendental answers, that is, an- 
swers exclusively based on concepts that are a priori, without 
the least empirical admixture. But the question under con- 
sideration is obviously synthetic, calling for an extension of our 
knowledge beyond all limits of experience, namely, to the 
existence of a being that is to correspond to a mere idea 
of ours, an idea that cannot be paralleled in any experience. 
Now as we have already proved, synthetic a priori knowledge 
is possible only in so far as it expresses the formal conditions 
of a possible experience; and all principles are therefore only 
of immanent validity, that is, they are applicable only to ob- 
jects of empirical knowledge, to appearances. Thus all attempts 
to 1 construct a theology through purely speculative reason, by 
means of a transcendental procedure, are without result. 

But even if anyone prefers to call in question all those 
proofs which have been given in the Analytic, rather than 
allow himself to be robbed of his conviction of the conclusive- 
ness of the arguments upon which he has so long relied, he 
still cannot refuse to meet my demand that he should at least 
give a satisfactory account how, and by what kind of inner 
illumination, he believes himself capable of soaring so far 
above all possible experience, on the wings of mere ideas. 
New proofs, or attempts to improve upon the old ones, I 
would ask to be spared. There is not indeed, in this field, much 
room for choice, since all merely speculative proofs in the 
end bring us always back to one and the same proof, namely, 
the ontological; and I have therefore no real ground to fear 
the fertile ingenuity of the dogmatic champions of super- 
sensible 1 reason. I shall not, however, decline the challenge j *?39 
to discover the fallacy in any attempt of this kind, and 
so to nullify its claims; and this I can indeed do without 

1 \sinnenfreten.] 

2 M 



530 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

considering myself a particularly combative person. But by 
such means I should never succeed in eradicating the hope 
of better fortune in those who have once become accustomed 
to dogmatic modes of persuasion; and I therefore confine 
myself to the moderate demand, that they give, in terms 
which are universal and which are based on the nature of the 
human understanding and of all our other sources of know- 
ledge, a satisfactory answer to this one question: how we can 
so much as make a beginning in the proposed task of ex- 
tending our knowledge entirely a priori^ and of carrying it 
into a realm where no experience is possible to us, and in 
which there is therefore no means of establishing the object- 
ive reality of any concept that we have ourselves invented. 
In whatever manner the understanding may have arrived at 
a concept, the existence of its object is never, by any process 
of analysis, discoverable within it; for the knowledge of the 
existence of the object consists precisely in the fact that the 
object is posited in itself, beyond the [mere] thought of it. 1 
Through concepts alone, it is quite impossible to advance to 
the discovery of new objects and supernatural 2 beings; and it 
is useless to appeal to experience, which in all cases yields only 
appearances. 

But although reason, in its merely speculative employ- 
ment, is very far from being equal to so great an undertak- 
ing, namely, to demonstrate the existence of a supreme being, 
B 6 3 j it is yet of very great utility in correcting any knowledge of this 
being which may be derived from other sources, in making it 
consistent with itself and with every point of view from which 
intelligible objects may be regarded, 3 and in freeing it from 
everything incompatible with the concept of an original 
being and from all admixture of empirical limitations. 

Transcendental theology is still, therefore, in spite of all 
its disabilities, of great importance in its negative employ- 
ment, and serves as a permanent censor of our reason, in so 
far as the latter deals merely with pure ideas which, as such, 
allow of no criterion that is not transcendental. For if, in some 
other relation, perhaps on practical grounds, the presupposi- 
tion of a supreme and all-sufficient being, as highest intelli- 

1 [ausser fam Gedanken.] a [uberschwenglicher.] 

3 [mit sick selbst und jeder intelligibilen Absicht.] 



CRITIQUE OF ALL THEOLOGY 531 

gence, established its validity beyond all question, it would be 
of the greatest importance accurately to determine this con- 
cept on its transcendental side, as the concept of a necessary 
and supremely real being, to free it from whatever, as be- 
longing to mere appearance (anthropomorphism in its wider 
sense), is out of keeping with the supreme reality, and at 
the same time to dispose of all counter-assertions, whether 
atheistic, deistic, or anthropomorphic. Such critical treatment 
is, indeed, far from being difficult, inasmuch as the same 
grounds which have enabled us to demonstrate the inability of 
human reason to maintain the existence of such a being must | B 55* 
also suffice to prove the invalidity of all counter-assertions. 
For from what source could we, through a purely speculative 
employment of reason, derive the knowledge that there is no 
supreme being as ultimate ground of all things, or that it has 
none of the attributes which, arguing from their consequences, 
we represent to ourselves as analogical with the dynamical 
realities of a thinking being, or (as the anthropomorphists 
contend) that it must be subject to all the limitations which 
sensibility inevitably imposes on those intelligences which are 
known to us through experience. 

Thus, while for the merely speculative employment of 
reason the supreme being remains a mere ideal, it is yet an 
ideal without a flaw, a concept which completes and crowns 
the whole of human knowledge. Its objective reality cannot 
indeed be proved, but also cannot be disproved, by merely 
speculative reason. If, then, there should be a moral theology 
that can make good this deficiency, transcendental theology, 
which before was problematic only, will prove itself indis- 
pensable in determining the concept of this supreme being 
and in constantly testing reason, which is so often deceived by 
sensibility, and which is frequently out of harmony with its 
own ideas. Necessity, infinity, unity, existence outside the 
world (and not as world-soul), eternity as free from conditions 
of time, omnipresence as free from conditions of space, omni- 
potence, etc. are purely transcendental predicates, and for 
this reason the purified concepts of them, which every theology 
finds so indispensable, are only to be obtained from tran- 
scendental theology. 



532 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 



APPENDIX TO THE TRANSCENDENTAL DIALECTIC 

THE REGULATIVE EMPLOYMENT OF THE IDEAS OF PURE 
REASON 

The outcome of all dialectical attempts of pure reason 
does not merely confirm what we have already proved in the 
Transcendental Analytic, namely, that all those conclusions of 
ours which profess to lead us beyond the field of possible ex- 
perience are deceptive and without foundation; it likewise 
teaches us this further lesson, that human reason has a natural 
tendency to transgress these limits, and that transcendental 
ideas are just as natural to it as the categories are to under- 
standing though with this difference, that while the categories 
lead to truth, that is, to the conformity of our concepts with 
the object, the ideas produce what, though a mere illusion, 
is none the less irresistible, and the harmful influence of 
which we can barely succeed in neutralising even by means 
of the severest criticism. 

Everything that has its basis in the nature of our powers 
must be appropriate to, and consistent with, their right em- 
ployment if only we can guard against a certain misunder- 
B 671} sending and so can discover the proper direction of these 
powers. We are entitled, therefore, to suppose that tran- 
scendental ideas have their own good, proper, and therefore 
immanent use, although, when their meaning is misunder- 
stood, and they are taken for concepts of real things, they 
become transcendent in their application and for that very 
reason can be delusive. For it is not the idea in itself, but its 
use only, that can be either transcendent or immanent (that 
is, either range beyond all possible experience or find em- 
ployment within its limits), according as it is applied to an 
object which is supposed to correspond to it, or is directed 
solely to the use of understanding in general, in respect of 
those objects that fall to be dealt with by the understand- 
ing. All errors of subreption are to be ascribed to a defect 
of judgment, 1 never to understanding or to reason. 

Reason is never in immediate relation to an object, but 

1 [Urtcilskraft.] 



REGULATIVE EMPLOYMENT OF THE IDEAS 533 

only to the understanding; and it is only through the under- 
standing that it has its own [specific] empirical employment. 
It does not, therefore, create concepts (of objects) but only 
orders them, and gives them that unity which they can have 
only if they be employed in their widest possible application, 
that is, with a view to obtaining totality in the various series. 
The understanding does not concern itself with this totality, 
but only with that connection through which, in accordance 
with concepts, such series of conditions come into being. 
Reason has, therefore, as its sole object, the understanding |g *H4 
and its effective application. Just as the understanding unifies 
the manifold in the object by means of concepts, so reason 
unifies the manifold of concepts by means of ideas, positing 
a certain collective unity as the goal of the activities of the 
understanding, which otherwise are concerned solely with 
distributive unity. 

I accordingly maintain that transcendental ideas never 
allow of any constitutive employment. When regarded in 
that mistaken manner, and therefore as supplying concepts 
of certain objects, they are but pseudo-rational, merely dia- 
l&amp;ctical concepts. On the other hand, they have an excellent, 
and indeed indispensably necessary, regulative employment, 
namely, that of directing the understanding towards a certain 
goal upon which the routes marked out by all its rules con- 
verge, as upon their point of intersection. This point is indeed 
a mere idea, a focus imaginarius^ from which, since it lies 
quite outside the bounds of possible experience, the concepts 
of the understanding do not in reality proceed; none the less 
it serves to give to these concepts the greatest [possible] unity 
combined with the greatest [possible] extension. Hence arises 
the illusion that the lines have their source in 1 a real object 
lying outside the field of empirically possible knowledge just 
as objects reflected in a mirror are seen as behind it. Never- 
theless this illusion (which need not, however, be allowed 
to deceive us) is indispensably necessary if we are to direct |g ^ 
the understanding beyond every given experience (as part of 
the sum of possible experience), and thereby to secure its 
greatest possible extension, just as, in the case of mirror- 
vision, the illusion involved is indispensably necessary if, 

1 [Reading, with Mellin, geflossen for ausgcschlossen."\ 



534 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

besides the objects which lie before our eyes, we are also to 
see those which lie at a distance behind our back. 

If we consider in its whole range the knowledge obtained 
for us by the understanding, we find that what is peculiarly 
distinctive of reason in its attitude to this body of knowledge, 
is that it prescribes and seeks to achieve its systematisation, 
that is, to exhibit the connection of its parts in conformity 
with a single principle. This unity of reason always presup- 
poses an idea, namely, that of the form of a whole of know- 
ledge a whole which is prior to the determinate knowledge 
of the parts and which contains the conditions that deter- 
mine a priori for every part its position and relation to 
the other parts. This idea accordingly postulates a complete 
unity in the knowledge obtained by the understanding, by 
which this knowledge is to be not a mere contingent aggregate, 
but a system connected according to necessary laws. We may 
not say that this idea is a concept of the object, but only of the 
thoroughgoing unity of such concepts, in so far as that unity 
serves as a rule for the understanding. These concepts of 
reason are not derived from nature; on the contrary, we in- 
terrogate nature in accordance with these ideas, and consider 
our knowledge as defective so long as it is not adequate to 
them. By general admission, pure earth&gt; pure water &gt; pure air, 
etc., are not to be found. We require, however, the concepts of 
them (though, in so far as their complete purity is concerned, 
they have their origin solely in reason) in order properly to 
determine the share which each of these natural causes has in 
producing appearances. Thus in order to explain the chemical 
interactions of bodies in accordance with the idea of a mechan- 
ism, every kind of matter is reduced to earths (qua mere 
weight), to salts and inflammable substances (qua force), and 
to water and air as vehicles (machines, as it were, by which 
the first two produce their effects). The modes of expression 
usually employed are, indeed, somewhat different; but the 
influence of reason on the classifications of the natural 
scientist is still easily detected. 

If reason is a faculty of deducing the particular from the 
universal, and if the universal is already certain in itself and 
given, only judgment 1 is required to execute the process of 

1 [Urteilskraft.] 



REGULATIVE EMPLOYMENT OF THE IDEAS 535 

subsumption, and the particular is thereby determined in a 
necessary manner. This I shall entitle the apodeictic use of 
reason. If, however, the universal is admitted as problem- 
atic only, and is a mere idea, the particular is certain, but 
the universality of the rule of which it is a consequence 
is still a problem. Several particular instances, which are 
one and all certain, are scrutinised in view of the rule, to 
see whether they follow from it. If it then appears that all 
particular instances which can be cited follow from the rule, 
we argue to its universality, and from this again to all particu- 
lar instances, even to those which are not themselves given. 
This I shall entitle the hypothetical employment of reason. 

The hypothetical employment of reason, based upon ideas 
viewed as problematic concepts, is not, properly speaking, 
constitutive, that is, it is not of such a character that, judging 
in^all strictness, we can regard it as proving the truth of the 
universal rule which we have adopted as hypothesis. For how 
are we to know all the possible consequences which, as actually 
following from the adopted principle, prove its universality? 
The hypothetical employment of reason is regulative only; its 
sble aim is, so far as may be possible, to bring unity into the 
body of our detailed knowledge, and thereby to approximate 
the rule to universality. 

The hypothetical employment of reason has, therefore, as 
its aim the systematic unity of the knowledge of understand- 
ing, and this unity is the criterion of the truth of its rules. The 
systematic unity (as a mere idea) is, however, only a projected 
unity, to be regarded not as given in itself, but as a problem 
only. This unity aids us in discovering a principle for the 
understanding in its manifold 1 and special modes of employ- 
ment, directing its attention to cases which are not given, and 
thus rendering it more coherent. 2 

But the only conclusion which we are justified in drawing 
from these considerations is that the systematic unity of the 
manifold knowledge of understanding^ prescribed by reason, 
is a logical principle. Its function is to assist the understanding 
by means of ideas, in those cases in which the understanding 
cannot by itself establish rules, and at the same time to give 

1 [Reading, with Valentiner, mannigfaltigen for ^fanni 
2 \zusammenhdngend '.] 



536 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

to the numerous and diverse rules of the understanding unity 
or system under a single principle, and thus to secure co- 
herence in every possible way. But to say that the constitu- 
tion of the objects or the nature of the understanding which 
knows them as such, is in itself determined to systematic 
unity, and that we can in a certain measure postulate this 
unity a priori, without reference to any such special interest 
of reason, and that we are therefore in a position to maintain 
that knowledge of the understanding in all its possible modes 
(including empirical knowledge) has the unity required by 
reason, and stands under common principles from which all 
its various modes can, in spite of their diversity, be deduced 
that would be to assert a transcendental principle of reason, 
and would make the systematic unity necessary, not only 
subjectively and logically, as method, but objectively also. 

We may illustrate this by an instance of the employment 
of reason. Among the various kinds of unity which conform 
to the concepts of the understanding, is that of the causality 
of a substance, which is called power. 1 The various appear- 
ances of one and the same substance show at first sight so 
great a diversity, that at the start we have to assume just ds 
many different powers as there are different effects. For in- 
A 649 j stance, in the human mind we have sensation, conscious- 
ness, imagination, memory, wit, power of discrimination, 
pleasure, desire, etc. Now there is a logical maxim which 
requires that we should reduce, so far as may be possible, this 
seeming diversity, by comparing these with one another and 
detecting their hidden identity. We have to enquire whether 
imagination combined with consciousness may not be the same 
thing as memory, wit, power of discrimination, and perhaps 
even identical with understanding and reason. Though logic 
is not capable of deciding whether a fundamental power 
actually exists, the idea of such a power is the problem in- 
volved in a systematic representation of the multiplicity of 
powers. The logical principle of reason calls upon us to bring 
about such unity as completely as possible; and the more the 
appearances of this and that power are found to be identical 
with one another, the more probable it becomes that they are 
simply different manifestations of one and the same power, 



REGULATIVE EMPLOYMENT OF THE IDEAS 537 

which may be entitled, relatively to the more specific powers, 
the fundamental power. The same is done with the other 
powers. 

The relatively fundamental powers must in turn be com- 
pared with one another, with a view to discovering their har- 
mony, and so to bring them nearer to a single radical, that 
is, absolutely fundamental, power. But this unity of reason is 
purely hypothetical. We do not assert that such a power must 
necessarily be met with, but that we must seek it in the 
interests of reason, that is, of establishing certain principles 
for the manifold rules which experience may supply to us. | B 6 ^g 
We must endeavour, wherever possible, to bring in this way 
systematic unity into our knowledge. 

On passing, however, to the transcendental employment 
of understanding, we find that this idea of a fundamental 
power is not treated merely as a problem for the hypothetical 
use of reason, but claims to have objective reality, as postulat- 
ing the systematic unity of the various powers of a substance, 
and as giving expression to an apodeictic principle of reason. 
For without having made any attempt to show the harmony 
Of these various powers, nay, even after all attempts to do so 
have failed, we yet presuppose that such a unity does actually 
exist, and this not only, as in the case cited, on account of the 
unity of the substance, but also in those cases in which, as with 
matter in general, we encounter powers which, though to a 
certain extent homogeneous, are likewise diverse. In all such 
cases reason presupposes the systematic unity of the various 
powers, on the ground that special natural laws fall under more 
general laws, and that parsimony in principles is not only an 
economical requirement of reason, but is one of nature's own 
laws. 

It is, indeed, difficult to understand how there can be a 
logical principle by which reason prescribes the unity of rules, 
unless we also presuppose a transcendental principle whereby 
such a systematic unity is a priori assumed to be necessarily 
inherent in the objects. For with what right can reason, in its | B 6 ^ 
logical employment, call upon us to treat the multiplicity of 
powers exhibited in nature as simply a disguised unity, and 
to derive this unity, so far as may be possible, from a funda- 
mental power how can reason do this, if It be free to admit 



538 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

as likewise possible that all powers may be heterogeneous, and 
that such systematic unity of derivation may not be in con- 
formity with nature? Reason would then run counter to its own 
vocation, proposing as its aim an idea quite inconsistent with 
the constitution of nature. Nor can we say that reason, while 
proceeding in accordance with its own principles, has arrived at 
knowledge of this unity through observation of the accidental 
constitution of nature. The law of reason which requires us to 
seek for this unity, is a necessary law, since without it we should 
have no reason at all, and without reason no coherent em- 
ployment of the understanding, and in the absence of this no 
sufficient criterion of empirical truth. In order, therefore, to 
secure an empirical criterion we have no option save to pre- 
suppose the systematic unity of nature as objectively valid and 
necessary. 

Although philosophers have not always acknowledged this 
transcendental principle, even to themselves, or indeed been 
conscious of employing it, we none the less find it covertly im- 
plied, in remarkable fashion, in the principles upon which they 
proceed. That the manifold respects in which individual things 
differ do not exclude identity of species, that the various species 
B 680} must ke regarded merely as different determinations of a few 
genera, and these, in turn, of still higher genera, and so on; in 
short, that we must seek for a certain systematic unity of all 
possible empirical concepts, in so far as they can be deduced 
from higher and more general concepts this is a logical 
principle, a rule of the Schools, without which there could 
be no employment of reason. For we can conclude from the 
universal to the particular, only in so far as universal pro- 
perties are ascribed to things as being the foundation upon 
which the particular properties rest. 

That such unity is to be found in nature, is presupposed by 
philosophers in the well-known scholastic maxim, that rudi- 
ments 1 or principles must not be unnecessarily multiplied (entia 
praeter necessitate, non esse multiplicandd). This maxim de- 
clares that things by their very nature supply material for the 
unity of reason, and that the seemingly infinite variety need 
not hinder us from assuming that behind this variety there is 
a unity of fundamental properties properties from which the 

i [Anfange.] 



REGULATIVE EMPLOYMENT OF THE IDEAS 539 

diversity can be derived through repeated determination. This 
unity, although it is a mere idea, has been at all times so eagerly 
sought, that there has been need to moderate the desire for it, 
not to encourage it. A great advance was made when chemists 
succeeded in reducing all salts to two main genera, acids and 
alkalies; and they endeavour to show that even this difference 
is merely a variety, or diverse manifestation, of one and the | B 6 gj 
same fundamental material. Chemists have sought, step by 
step, to reduce the different kinds of earths (the material of 
stones and even of metals) to three, and at last to two; but, not 
content with this, they are unable to banish the thought that 
behind these varieties there is but one genus, nay, that there 
may even be a common principle for the earths and the salts. 
It might be supposed that this is merely an economical con- 
trivance whereby reason seeks to save itself all possible trouble, 
a hypothetical attempt, which, if it succeeds, will, through the 
unity thus attained, impart probability to the presumed prin- 
ciple of explanation. But such a selfish purpose can very easily 
be distinguished from the idea. For in conformity with the 
idea everyone presupposes that this unity of reason accords 
with nature itself, and that reason although indeed unable 
to determine the limits of this unity does not here beg but 
command. 

If among the appearances which present themselves to us, 
there were so great a variety I do not say in form, for in that 
respect the appearances might resemble one another; but in 
content, that is, in the manifoldness of the existing entities 
that even the acutest human understanding could never by 
comparison of them detect the slightest similarity (a possi- 
bility which is quite conceivable), the logical law of genera 
would have no sort of standing; we should not even have the 
concept of a genus, or indeed any other universal concept; and 
the understanding itself, which has to do solely with such con- 
cepts, would be non-existent. If, therefore, the logical prin- 
ciple of genera is to be applied to nature (by which I here under- 
stand those objects only which are given to us), it presupposes 
a transcendental principle. And in accordance with this latter 
principle, homogeneity is necessarily presupposed in the mani- 
fold of possible experience (although we are not in a position 
to determine in a priori fashion its degree);* for in the absence 



540 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

of homogeneity, no empirical concepts, and therefore no ex- 
perience, would be possible. 

The logical principle of genera, which postulates identity, 
is balanced by another principle, namely, that of species, 
which calls for manifoldness and diversity in things, notwith- 
standing their agreement as coming under the same genus, 
and which prescribes to the understanding that it attend to the 
diversity no less than to the identity. This principle (of discrimi- 
native observation, that is, of the faculty of distinction) sets 
a limit to possible indiscretion in the former principle (of the 
faculty of wit l ); and reason thus exhibits a twofold, self-con- 
flicting interest, on the one hand interest in extent (universal- 
ity) in respect of genera, and on the other hand in content (de- 
terminateness) in respect of the multiplicity of the species. In 
the one case the understanding thinks more under its concepts, 
B 6^3} * n *ke otner more i n them. This twofold interest manifests, it- 
self also among students of nature in the diversity of their ways 
of thinking. Those who are more especially speculative are, 
we may almost say, hostile to heterogeneity, and are always on 
the watch for the unity of the genus; those, on the other hand, 
who are more especially empirical, are constantly endeavour- 
ing to differentiate nature in such manifold fashion as almost 
to extinguish the hope of ever being able to determine its ap- 
pearances in accordance with universal principles. 

This latter mode of thought is evidently based upon a logi- 
cal principle which aims at the systematic completeness of all 
knowledge prescribing that, in beginning with the genus, we 
descend to the manifold which may be contained thereunder, 
in such fashion as to secure extension for the system, just as in 
the alternative procedure, that of ascending to the genus, we 
endeavour to secure the unity of the system. For if we limit 
our attention to the sphere of the concept which marks out a 
genus, we can no more determine how far it is possible to pro- 
ceed in the [logical] division of it, than we can judge merely 
from the space which a body occupies how far it is possible to 
proceed in the [physical] division of its parts. Consequently, 

1 [In his Antkropologie&gt; i. 42, Kant defines wit (ingcniuiri) as the faculty by 
which we determine the universal appropriate to the particular, in contrast to the 
faculty of judgment, by which we determine the particular that accords with the 
universal.] 



REGULATIVE EMPLOYMENT OF THE IDEAS 541 

every genus requires diversity of species, and these in turn 
diversity of subspecies; and since no one of these subspecies is 
ever itself without a sphere (extent as conceptus communis), 
reason, in being carried to completion, demands that no 
species be regarded as being in itself the lowest. For since the 
species is always a concept, containing only what is common 
to different things, it is not completely determined. It cannot, 
therefore, be directly related to an individual, and other con- |g 
cepts, that is, subspecies, must always be contained under it. 
This law of specification can be formulated as being the prin- 
ciple: entium varietates non temere esse minuendas. 

But it is easily seen that this logical law would be without 
meaning and application if it did not rest upon a transcendental 
law of specification, which does not indeed demand an actual 
infinity of differences in the things which can be objects to us 
the logical principle, as affirming only the indeterminateness 
of the logical sphere in respect of possible division, gives no 
occasion for any such assertion but which none the less im- 
poses upon the understanding the obligation of seeking under 
every discoverable species for subspecies, and under every dif- 
fe'rence for yet smaller differences. For if there were no lower 
concepts, there could not be higher concepts. Now the under- 
standing can have knowledge only through concepts, and 
therefore, however far it carries the process of division, never 
through mere intuition, but always again through lower 
concepts. The knowledge of appearances in their complete 
determination, which is possible only through the under- 
standing, demands an endless progress in the specification of 
our concepts, and an advance to yet other remaining differ- 
ences, from which we have made abstraction in the concept of 
the species, and still more so in that of the genus. 

This law of specification cannot be derived from experi- |g ^5 
ence, which can never open to our view any such extensive 
prospects. Empirical specification soon comes to a stop in the 
distinction of the manifold, if it be not guided by the ante- 
cedent transcendental law of specification, which, as a prin- 
ciple of reason, leads us to seek always for further differences, 
and to suspect their existence even when the senses are unable 
to disclose them. That absorbent earths are of different kinds 
(chalk and muriatic earths), is a discovery that was possible 



542 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

only under the guidance of an antecedent rule of reason reason 
proceeding on the assumption that nature is so richly diversi- 
fied that we may presume the presence of such differences, 
and therefore prescribing to the understanding the task of 
searching for them. Indeed it is only on the assumption of 
differences in nature, just as it is also only under the condition 
that its objects exhibit homogeneity, that we can have any 
faculty of understanding whatsoever. For the diversity of that 
which is comprehended under a concept is precisely what gives 
occasion for the employment of the concept and the exercise 
of the understanding. 

Reason thus prepares the field for the understanding: (i) 
through a principle of the homogeneity of the manifold under 
higher genera; (2) through a principle of the variety of the 
homogeneous under lower species; and (3) in order to complete 
the systematic unity, a further law, that of the affinity of all 
concepts a law which prescribes that we proceed from each 
B 686J s P ec * es to ever Y other by gradual increase of the diversity. 
These we may entitle the principles of homogeneity ', specifica- 
tion^ and continuity of forms. The last named arises from 
union of the other two, inasmuch as only through the pro- 
cesses of ascending to the higher genera and of descending to 
the lower species do we obtain the idea of systematic connec- 
tion in its completeness. For all the manifold differences are 
then related to one another, inasmuch as they one and all 
spring from one highest genus, through all degrees of a more 
and more widely extended determination. 

The systematic unity, prescribed by the three logical 
principles, can be illustrated in the following manner. Every 
concept may be regarded as a point which, as the station for 
an observer, has its own horizon, that is, a variety of things 
which can be represented, and, as it were, surveyed from that 
standpoint. This horizon must be capable of containing an 
infinite number of points, each of which has its own narrower 
horizon; that is, every species contains subspecies, according 
to the principle of specification, and the logical horizon con- 
sists exclusively of smaller horizons (subspecies), never of 
points which possess no extent (individuals). But for different 
horizons, that is, genera, each of which is determined by its 
own concept, there can be a common horizon, in reference to 



REGULATIVE EMPLOYMENT OF THE IDEAS 543 

which, as from a common centre, they can all be surveyed; and 
from this higher genus we can proceed until we arrive at the 
highest of all genera, and so at the universal and true horizon, 
which is determined from the standpoint of the highest con- 
cept, and which comprehends under itself all manifoldness 
genera, species, and subspecies. 

We are carried to this highest standpoint by the law of 
homogeneity, and to all lower standpoints, and their greatest 
possible variety, by the law of specification. And since there 
is thus no void in the whole sphere of all possible concepts, 
and since nothing can be met with outside this sphere, 
there arises from the presupposition of this universal horizon 
and of its complete division, the principle: non datur vacuum 
formarum, that is, that there are not different, original, first 
genera, which are isolated from one another, separated, as it 
were, by an empty intervening space; but that all the manifold 
genera are simply divisions of one single highest and universal 
genus. From this principle there follows, as its immediate con- 
sequence: datur continuum formarum, that is, that all differ- 
ences of species border upon one another, admitting of no 
transition from one to another per saltum, but only through 
all the smaller degrees of difference that mediate between 
them. In short, there are no species or subspecies which (in 
the view of reason) are the nearest possible to each other; still 
other intermediate species are always possible, the difference 
of which from each of the former is always smaller than the 
difference between these. 

The first law thus keeps us from resting satisfied with an 
excessive number of different original genera, and bids us pay 
due regard to homogeneity; the second, in turn, imposes a 
check upon this tendency towards unity, and insists that be- 
fore we proceed to apply a universal concept to individuals we 
distinguish subspecies within it. The third law combines these 
two laws by prescribing x that even amidst the utmost mani- 
foldness we observe homogeneity in the gradual transition 
from one species to another, and thus recognise a relationship 
of the different branches, as all springing from the same stem. 

This logical law of the continuum specierum (formarum 
logicarum) presupposes, however, a transcendental law (lex 
1 [Reading, with Hartenstein, es for &gt;.] 



544 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

continui in naturd), without which the former law would only 
lead the understanding astray, causing it 1 to follow a path 
which is perhaps quite contrary to that prescribed by nature 
itself. This law must therefore rest upon pure transcendental, 
not on empirical, grounds. For if it rested on empirical 
grounds, it would come later than the systems, whereas in 
actual fact it has itself given rise to all that is systematic in 
our knowledge of nature. The formulation of these laws is 
not due to any secret design of making an experiment, by 
putting them forward as merely tentative suggestions. Such 

B 689} anticipations, when confirmed, yield strong evidence in sup- 
port of the view that the hypothetically conceived unity is 
well-grounded; and such evidence has therefore in this re- 
spect a certain utility. But it is evident that the laws contem- 
plate the parsimony of fundamental causes, the manifoldness 
of effects, and the consequent affinity of the parts of nature 
as being in themselves in accordance both with reason and 
with nature. Hence these principles carry their recommend- 
ation directly in themselves, and not merely as methodo- 
logical devices. 

But it is easily seen that this continuity of forms is a mer'e 
idea, to which no congruent object can be discovered in ex- 
perience. For in the first place, the species in nature are actually 
divided, and must therefore constitute a quantum discretum. 
Were the advance in the tracing of their affinity continuous, 
there would be a true infinity of intermediate members be- 
tween any two given species, which is impossible. And further, 
in the second place, we could not make any determinate em- 
pirical use of this law, since it instructs us only in quite general 
terms that we are to seek for grades of affinity, and yields no 
criterion whatsoever as to how far, and in what manner, we 
are to prosecute the search for them. 

B 690} If we pl ace these principles of systematic unity in the order 
appropriate to their empirical employment, they will stand 
thus: manifoldness, affinity, unity, each being taken, as an 
idea, 2 in the highest degree of its completeness. Reason pre- 
supposes the knowledge which is obtained by the understand- 
ing and which stands in immediate relation to experience, and 

1 [Reading, with Erdmann, er for sie.} 
a [Reading, with Erdmann, Idee for Ideen.] , 



REGULATIVE EMPLOYMENT OF THE IDEAS 545 

seeks for the unity of this knowledge in accordance with ideas 
which go far beyond all possible experience. The affinity of 
the manifold (as, notwithstanding its diversity, coming under 
a principle of unity) refers indeed to things, but still more to 
their properties and powers. Thus, for instance, if at first our im- 
perfect experience leads us to regard the orbits of the planets 
as circular, and if we subsequently detect deviations therefrom, 
we trace the deviations to that which can change the circle, 
in accordance with a fixed law, through all the infinite inter- 
mediate degrees, into one of these divergent orbits. That is to 
say, we assume that the movements of the planets which are 
not circular will more or less approximate to the properties of a 
circle; and thus we come upon the idea of an ellipse. Since the 
comets do not, so far as observation reaches, return in any such 
courses, their paths exhibit still greater deviations. What we 
then do is to suppose that they proceed in a parabolic course, 
which is akin to the ellipse, and which in all our observations | B 
is indistinguishable from an ellipse that has its major axis in- 
definitely extended. Thus, under the guidance of these prin- 
ciples, we discover a unity in the generic forms of the orbits, 
and thereby a unity in the cause of all the laws of planetary 
motion, namely, gravitation. And we then extend our con- 
quests still further, endeavouring to explain by the same prin- 
ciple all variations and seeming departures from these rules; 
finally, we even go on to make additions such as experience 
can never confirm, namely, to conceive, in accordance with 
the rules of affinity, hyperbolic paths of comets, in the course 
of which these bodies entirely leave our solar system, and 
passing from sun to sun, unite the most distant parts of the 
universe a universe which, though for us unlimited, is 
throughout held together by one and the same moving force. 
The remarkable feature of these principles, and what in 
them alone concerns us, is that they seem to be transcendental, 
and that although they contain mere ideas for the guidance of 
the empirical employment of reason ideas which reason 
follows only as it were asymptotically, i.e. ever more closely 
without ever reaching them they yet possess, as synthetic 
a priori propositions, objective but indeterminate validity, and 
serve as rules for possible experience. They can also be em- 
ployed with great advantage in the elaboration of experience, 

2N 



546 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

as heuristic principles. A transcendental deduction of them 
B e 6 *} cannot however, be effected; in the case of ideas, as we have 
shown above, such a deduction is never possible. 

In the Transcendental Analytic we have distinguished the 
dynamical principles of the understanding, as merely regula- 
tive principles of intuition) from the mathematical, which, as 
regards intuition, are constitutive. None the less these dyna- 
mical laws are constitutive in respect of experience, since they 
render the concepts, without which there can be no experi- 
ence, possible a priori. But principles of pure reason can 
never be constitutive in respect of empirical concepts', for since 
no schema of sensibility corresponding to them can ever be 
given, they can never have an object in concrete. If, then, we 
disallow such empirical employment of them, as constitutive 
principles, how are we to secure for them a regulative em- 
ployment, and therewith some sort of objective validity, and 
what can we mean by such regulative employment? 

The understanding is an object for reason, just as sensi- 
bility is for the understanding. It is the business of reason to 
render the unity of all possible empirical acts of the under- 
standing systematic; just as it is of the understanding to con- 
nect the manifold of the appearances by means of concepts, 
and to bring it under empirical laws. But the acts of the under- 
standing are, without the schemata of sensibility, undeter- 
B 693} m * ne d\ J ust as tne unity of reason is in itself undetermined, as 
regards the conditions under which, and the extent to which, 
the understanding ought to combine its concepts in systematic 
fashion. But although we are unable to find in intuition a 
schema for the complete systematic unity of all concepts of the 
understanding, an analogon of such a schema must necessarily 
allow of being given. This analogon is the idea of the maxi- 
mum in the division and unification of the knowledge of the 
understanding under one principle. For what is greatest and 
absolutely complete can be determinately thought, all re- 
stricting conditions, which give rise to an indeterminate 
manifoldness, being left aside. Thus the idea of reason is 
an analogon of a schema of sensibility; but with this differ- 
ence, that the application of the concepts of the understanding 
to the schema of reason does not yield knowledge of the object 
itself (as is the case in the application of categories to their 



REGULATIVE EMPLOYMENT OF THE IDEAS 547 

sensible schemata), but only a rule or principle for the system- 
atic unity of all employment of the understanding. Now 
since every principle which prescribes a priori to the under- 
standing thoroughgoing unity in its employment, also holds, 
although only indirectly, of the object of experience, the 
principles of pure reason must also have objective reality 
in respect of that object, not, however, in order to determine 
anything in it, 1 but only in order to indicate the procedure 
whereby the empirical and determinate employment of the 
understanding can be brought into complete harmony with A 666 
itself. This is achieved by bringing its employment, so far as 
may be possible, into connection with the principle of thorough- 
going unity, and by determining its procedure in the light of 
this principle. 

I entitle all subjective principles which are derived, not 
from the constitution of an object but from the interest of 
reason in respect of a certain possible perfection of the 
knowledge of the object, maxims of reason. There are there- 
fore maxims of speculative reason, which rest entirely on its 
speculative interest, although they may seem to be objective 
principles. 

When merely regulative principles are treated as constitu- 
tive, and are therefore employed as objective principles, they 
may come into conflict with one another. But when they 
are treated merely as maxims, there is no real conflict, but 
merely those differences in the interest of reason that give rise 
to differing modes of thought. In actual fact, reason has only 
one single interest, and the conflict of its maxims is only a 
difference in, and a mutual limitation of, the methods where- 
by this interest endeavours to obtain satisfaction. 

Thus one thinker may be more particularly interested in 
manifoldness (in accordance with the principle of specifica- 
tion), another thinker in unity (in accordance with the prin- 
ciple of aggregation). 2 Each believes that his judgment has 
been arrived at through insight into the object, whereas it really 
rests entirely on the greater or lesser attachment to one of the 
two principles. And since neither of these principles is based 
on objective grounds, but solely on the interest of reason, the 

1 [Reading, with Wille, ihm for ihnyi.} 
* [Aggregation.] 



548 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

title 'principles' is not strictly applicable; they may more fit- 
tingly be entitled 'maxims'. When we observe intelligent people 
disputing in regard to the characteristic properties of men, 
animals, or plants even of bodies in the mineral realm some 
assuming, for instance, that there are certain special heredit- 
ary characteristics in each nation, certain well-defined inherited 
differences in families, races, etc., whereas others are bent upon 
maintaining that in all such cases nature has made precisely 
the same provision for all, and that it is solely to external 
accidental conditions that the differences are due, we have 
only to consider what sort of an object it is about which they 
are making these assertions, to realise that it lies too deeply 
hidden to allow of their speaking from insight into its nature. 
The dispute is due simply to the twofold interest of reason, 
the one party setting its heart upon, or at least adopting, the 
one interest, and the other party the other. The differences 
between the maxims of manifoldness and of unity in nature 
thus easily allow of reconciliation. So long, however, as the 
B 696} niaxims are taken as yielding objective insight, and until a 
way has been discovered of adjusting their conflicting claims, 
and of satisfying reason in that regard, they will not orily 
give rise to disputes but will be a positive hindrance, and 
cause long delays in the discovery of truth. 

Similar observations are relevant in regard to the assertion 
or denial of the widely discussed law of the continuous grada- 
tion of created beings, which was propounded by Leibniz, 1 and 
admirably supported by Bonnet. 2 It is simply the following 
out of that principle of affinity which rests on the interest of 
reason. For observation and insight into the constitution of 
nature could never justify us in the objective assertion of the 
law. The steps of this ladder, as they are presented to us in 
experience, stand much too far apart; and what may seem to 
us small differences are usually in nature itself such wide gaps, 
that from any such observations we can come to no decision 
in regard to nature's ultimate design especially if we bear in 
mind that in so great a multiplicity of things there can never 
be much difficulty in finding similarities and approximations. 
On the other hand, the method of looking for order in nature 

1 [Leibniz: Nouveaux Essais, Liv. iii. ch. 6.] 
* [Charles BpJWt (1726-93): Betrachtungen itber die Natur, pp. 29-85.] 



NATURAL DIALECTIC OF HUMAN REASON 549 

in accordance with such a principle, and the maxim which 
prescribes that we regard such order leaving, however, un- 
determined where and how far as grounded in nature as 
such, is certainly a legitimate and excellent regulative prin- 
ciple of reason. In this regulative capacity it goes far beyond 
what experience or observation can verify; and though not 
itself determining anything, yet serves to mark out the path 
towards systematic unity. 



THE FINAL PURPOSE OF THE NATURAL DIALECTIC 
OF HUMAN REASON 

The ideas of pure reason can never be dialectical in them- 
selves; any deceptive illusion to which they give occasion 
must be due solely to their misemployment. For they arise 
from the very nature of our reason; and it is impossible that 
this highest tribunal of all the rights and claims of speculation 
should itself be the source of deceptions and illusions. Pre- 
sumably, therefore, the ideas have their own good and ap- 
propriate vocation as determined by the natural disposition of 
ou*r reason. The mob of sophists, however, raise against reason 
the usual cry of absurdities and contradictions, and though 
unable to penetrate to its innermost designs, they none the less 
inveigh against its prescriptions. Yet it is to the beneficent in- 
fluences exercised by reason that they owe the possibility of 
their own self-assertiveness, and indeed that very culture 1 
which enables them to blame and to condemn what reason 
requires of them. 

We cannot employ an a priori concept with any certainty 
without having first given a transcendental deduction of it. 
The ideas of pure reason do not, indeed, admit of the kind of 
deduction that is possible in the case of the categories. But if 
they are to have the least objective validity, no matter how 
indeterminate that validity may be, and are not to be mere 
empty thought-entities 2 (entia rationis ratiocinantis),&amp;&amp;efoic- 
tion of them must be possible, however greatly (as we admit) |g 
it may differ from that which we have been able to give of the 
categories. This will complete the critical work of pure reason, 
and is what we now propose to undertake. 

* [Kultur.] 8 \Gcdankendinge.] 



550 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

There is a great difference between something being given 
to my reason as an object absolutely ', or merely as an object in 
the idea. In the former case our concepts are employed to deter- 
mine the object; in the latter case there is in fact only a schema 
for which no object, not even a hypothetical one, is directly 
given, and which only enables us to represent to ourselves 
other objects in an indirect manner, namely in their systematic 
unity, by means of their relation to this idea. Thus I say that 
the concept of a highest intelligence is a mere idea, that is 
to say, its objective reality is not to be taken as consisting in 
its referring directly to an object (for in that sense we should 
not be able to justify its objective validity). It is only a schema 
constructed in accordance with the conditions of the greatest 
possible unity of reason the schema of the concept of a thing 
in general, which serves only to secure the greatest possible sys- 
tematic unity in the empirical employment of our reason. We 
then, as it were, derive the object of experience from the sup- 
posed object of this idea, viewed as the ground or cause of the 
object of experience. We declare, for instance, that the things 
B 699} f tne wor ld must be viewed as if they received their existence 
from a highest intelligence. The idea is thus really only a heur- 
istic, not an ostensive concept. It does not show us how an 
object is constituted, but how, under its guidance, we should 
seek to determine the constitution and connection of the objects 
of experience. If, then, it can be shown that the three transcen- 
dental ideas (the psychological, the cosmological, and the theo- 
logical), although they do not directly relate to, or determine, 
any object corresponding to them, none the less, as 1 rules of the 
empirical employment of reason, lead us to systematic unity, 
under the presupposition of such an object in the idea\ and 
that they thus contribute to the extension of empirical know- 
ledge, without ever being in a position to run counter to it, 
we may conclude that it is a necessary maxim of reason to 
proceed always in accordance with such ideas. This, indeed, 
is the transcendental deduction of all ideas of speculative 
reason, not as constitutive principles for the extension of our 
knowledge to more objects than experience can give, but as 
regulative principles of the systematic unity of the manifold 
of empirical knowledge in general, whereby this empirical 

c 

1 [Reading, with Grille, als for 



NATURAL DIALECTIC OF HUMAN REASON 551 

knowledge is more adequately secured within its own limits 
and more effectively improved than would be possible, in the 
absence of such ideas, through the employment merely of the 
principles of the understanding. 

I shall endeavour to make this clearer. In conformity with 
these ideas as principles we shall, first, in psychology, under 
the guidance of inner experience, connect all the appearances, 
all the actions and receptivity of our mind, as z/the mind were 
a simple substance which persists with personal identity (in 
this life at least), while its states, to which those of the body 
belong only as outer conditions, are in continual change. 
Secondly, in cosmology, we must follow up the conditions of 
both inner and outer natural appearances, in an enquiry which 
is to be regarded as never allowing of completion, just as if 
the series of appearances were in itself endless, without any 
first or supreme member. We need not, in so doing, deny that, 
outside all appearances, there are purely intelligible grounds 
of the appearances; but as we have no knowledge of these 
whatsoever, we must never attempt to make use of them in our 
explanations of nature. Thirdly, and finally, in the domain 
of theology, we must view everything that can belong to the 
context of possible experience as if this experience formed 
an absolute but at the same time completely dependent and 
sensibly conditioned unity, and yet also at the same time as if 
the sum of all appearances (the sensible world itself) had a 
single, highest and all-sufficient ground beyond itself, namely, 
a self-subsistent, original, creative reason. For it is in the light 
of this idea of a creative reason that we so guide the empirical | B ^ 
employment of our reason as to secure its greatest possible 
extension that is, by viewing all objects as */ they drew their 
origin from such an archetype. In other words, we ought not 
to derive the inner appearances of the soul from a simple 
thinking substance but from one another, in accordance with 
the idea of a simple being; we ought not to derive the order 
and systematic unity of the world from a supreme intelligence, 
but to obtain from the idea of a supremely wise cause the rule 
according to which reason in connecting empirical causes and 
effects in the world may be employed to best advantage, and in 
such manner as to secure satisfaction of its own demands. 

Now tjiere is nothing whatsoever to hinder us from as- 



552 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

suming these ideas to be also objective, that is, from hyposta- 
tising them except in the case of the cosmological ideas, 
where reason, in so proceeding, falls into antinomy. The 
psychological and theological ideas contain no antinomy, 
and involve no contradiction. How, then, can anyone dispute 
their [possible] objective reality? He who denies their possi- 
bility must do so with just as little knowledge [of this possi- 
bility] as we can have in affirming it. It is not, however, a 
sufficient ground for assuming anything, that there is no 
positive hindrance to our so doing; we are not justified in 
introducing thought-entities 1 which transcend all our con- 
cepts, though without contradicting them, as being real and 
determinate objects, merely on the authority of a speculative 
reason that is bent upon completing the tasks which it has 
B 702} set * tse tf- They ought not to be assumed as existing in 
themselves, but only as having the reality of a schema the 
schema of the regulative principle of the systematic unity of 
all knowledge of nature. They should be regarded only as 
analoga of real things, not as in themselves real things. We 
remove from the object of the idea the conditions which limit 
the concept provided by our understanding, but which als*o 
alone make it possible for us to have a determinate con- 
cept of anything. What we then think is a something of 
which, as it is in itself, we have no concept whatsoever, but 
which we none the less represent to ourselves as standing to 
the sum of appearances in a relation analogous to that in 
which appearances stand to one another. 

If, in this manner, we assume such ideal beings, we do not 
really extend our knowledge beyond the objects of possible 
experience; we extend only the empirical unity of such experi- 
ence, by means of the systematic unity for which the schema 
is provided by the idea an idea which has therefore no claim 
to be a constitutive, but only a regulative principle. For 
to allow that we posit a thing, a something, a real being, 
corresponding to the idea, is not to say that we profess 
to extend our knowledge of things by means of transcen- 
dental 2 concepts. For this being is posited only in the idea and 
not in itself; and therefore only as expressing the systematic 

1 [Gedankenwesen.] 
2 [Reading, with tlie 4th edition, transcendentalen for transcendenten.] 



NATURAL DIALECTIC OF HUMAN REASON 553 

unity which is to serve as a rule for the empirical employ- 
ment of reason. It decides nothing in regard to the ground of 
this unity or as to what may be the inner character of the being 
on which as cause the unity depends. 

Thus the transcendental, and the only determinate, con- 
cept which the purely speculative reason gives us of God is, in 
the strictest sense, deistic, that is, reason does not determine 
the objective validity of such a concept, but yields only the 
idea of something which is the ground of the highest and 
necessary unity of all empirical reality. This something we 
cannot think otherwise than on the analogy of a real sub- 
stance that, in conformity with laws of reason, is the cause 
of all things. This, indeed, is how we must think it, in 
so far as we venture to think it as a special object, and do 
not rather remain satisfied with the mere idea of the regu- 
la^tive principle of reason, leaving aside the completion of 
all conditions of thought as being too surpassingly great 
for the human understanding. The latter procedure is, how- 
ever, inconsistent with the pursuit of that complete system- 
atic unity in our knowledge to which reason at least sets 
rlo limits. 

This, then, is how matters stand: if we assume a divine 
being, we have indeed no concept whatsoever either of the 
inner possibility of its supreme perfection or of the necessity 
of its existence; but, on the other hand, we are in a position |g 
to give a satisfactory answer to all those questions which 
relate to the contingent, and to afford reason the most com- 
plete satisfaction in respect to that highest unity after which 
it is seeking in its empirical employment. The fact, however, 
that we are unable to satisfy reason in respect to the assump- 
tion itself, shows that it is the speculative interest of reason, 
not any insight, which justifies it in thus starting from a point 
that lies so far above its sphere; and in endeavouring, by this 
device, to survey its objects as constituting a complete whole. 

We here come upon a distinction bearing on the procedure 
of thought in dealing with one and the same assumption, a 
distinction which is somewhat subtle, but of great importance 
in transcendental philosophy. I may have sufficient ground to 
assume something, in a relative sense (suppositio relativa), and 
yet have wo right to assume it absolutely (suppositio absoluta). 



554 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

This distinction has to be reckoned with in the case of a 
merely regulative principle. We recognise the necessity of the 
principle, but have no knowledge of the source of its neces- 
sity; and in assuming that it has a supreme ground, we do so 
solely in order to think its universality more determinately. 
Thus, for instance, when I think as existing a being that 
corresponds to a mere idea, indeed to a transcendental idea, 
I have no right to assume any such thing as in itself exist- 
ing, since no concepts through which I am able to think any 

B 705} object as determined suffice for such a purpose the condi- 
tions which are required for the objective validity of my con- 
cepts being excluded by the idea itself. The concepts of reality, 
substance, causality, even that of necessity in existence, apart 
from their use in making possible the empirical knowledge of 
an object, have no meaning whatsoever, such as might serve 
to determine any object. They can be employed, therefore, to 
explain the possibility of things in the world of sense, but not 
to explain the possibility of the universe itself. Such a ground 
of explanation would have to be outside the world, and could 
not therefore be an object of a possible experience. None the 
less, though I cannot assume such an inconceivable being [a 
existing] in itself, I may yet assume it as the object of a mere 
idea, relatively to the world of sense. For if the greatest 
possible empirical employment of my reason rests upon an 
idea (that of systematically complete unity, which I shall 
presently be defining more precisely), an idea which, al- 
though it can never itself be adequately exhibited in experi- 
ence, is yet indispensably necessary in order that we may 
approximate to the highest possible degree of empirical unity, 
I shall not only be entitled, but shall also be constrained, to 
realise this idea, that is, to posit for it a real object. But I may 
posit it only as a something which I do not at all know in 
itself, and to which, as a ground of that systematic unity, I 

B 706 } ascribe, in relation to this unity, such properties as are ana- 
logous to the concepts employed by the understanding in the 
empirical sphere. Accordingly, in analogy with realities in 
the world, that is, with substances, with causality and with 
necessity, I think a being which possesses all this in the 
highest perfection; and since this idea depends merely on 
my reason, I can think this being as selj-subsistent reason. 



NATURAL DIALECTIC OF HUMAN REASON 555 

which through ideas of the greatest harmony and unity is 
the cause of the universe. I thus omit all conditions which 
might limit the idea, solely in order, under countenance of 
such an original ground, to make possible systematic unity 
of the manifold in the universe, and thereby the greatest 
possible empirical employment of reason. This I do by repre- 
senting all connections as if they were the ordinances of a 
supreme reason, of which our reason is but a faint copy. I then 
proceed to think this supreme being exclusively through con- 
cepts which, properly, are applicable only in the world of 
sense. But since I make none but a relative use of the trans- 
cendental assumption, namely, as giving the substratum of 
the greatest possible unity of experience, I am quite in order in 
thinking a being which I distinguish from the world of sense, 
through properties which belong solely to that world. For I 
6f&gt; not seek, nor am I justified in seeking, to know this object 
of my idea according to what it may be in itself. There are no 
concepts available for any such purpose; even the concepts of |g 2% 
reality, substance, causality, nay, even that of necessity in 
existence, lose all meaning, and are empty titles for [possible] 
concepts, themselves entirely without content, when we thus 
venture with them outside the field of the senses. I think to 
myself merely the relation of a being, in itself completely un- 
known to me, to the greatest possible systematic unity of the 
universe, solely for the purpose of using it as a schema of the 
regulative principle of the greatest possible empirical employ- 
ment of my reason. 

If it be the transcendental object of our idea that we have 
in view, it is obvious that we cannot thus, in terms of the 
concepts of reality, substance, causality, etc., presuppose its 
reality in itself, since these concepts have not the least applica- 
tion to anything that is entirely distinct from the world of sense. 
The supposition which reason makes of a supreme being, as 
the highest cause, is, therefore relative only; it is devised solely 
for the sake of systematic unity in the world of sense, and is a 
mere something in idea, of which, as it may be in itself &gt; we 
have no concept This explains why, in relation to what is 
given to the senses as existing, we require the idea of a prim- 
ordial being necessary in itself &gt; and yet can never form the 
slightest concept of it or of its absolute necessity. 



556 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

We are now in a position to have a clear view of the outcome 
B 708 / of the whole Transcendental Dialectic, and accurately to define 
the final purpose of the ideas of pure reason, which become 
dialectical only through heedlessness and misapprehension. 
Pure reason is in fact occupied with nothing but itself. It can 
have no other vocation. For what is given to it does not consist 
in objects that have to be brought to the unity of the empirical 
concept, but in those modes of knowledge supplied by the 
understanding that require to be brought to the unity of the 
concept of reason that is, to unity of connection in conform- 
ity with a principle. The unity of reason is the unity of system; 
and this systematic unity does not serve objectively as a prin- 
ciple that extends the application of reason to objects, but sub- 
jectively as a maxim that extends its application to all possible 
empirical knowledge of objects. Nevertheless, since the system- 
atic connection which reason can give to the empirical em- 
ployment of the understanding not only furthers its extension, 
but also guarantees its correctness, the principle of such system- 
atic unity is so far also objective, but in an indeterminate 
manner (principium vagum). It is not a constitutive principle 
that enables us to determine anything in respect of its direct 
object, but only a merely regulative principle and maxim, to 
further and strengthen in infinitum (indeterminately) the 
empirical employment of reason never in any way proceed- 
ing counter to the laws of its empirical employment, and yet 
at the same time opening out new paths which are not within 
the cognisance of the understanding. 

B 700} ^ ut reason cannot think this systematic unity otherwise 
than by giving to the idea of this unity an object; and since 
experience can never give an example of complete systematic 
unity, the object which we have to assign to the idea is not 
such as experience can ever supply. This object, as thus enter- 
tained by reason (ens rationis ratiocinatae), is a mere idea; 
it is not assumed as a something that is real absolutely and 
in itself^ but is postulated only problematically (since we 
cannot reach it through any of the concepts of the under- 
standing) in order that we may view all connection of the 
things of the world of sense as if they had their ground in such 
a being. In thus proceeding, our sole purpose is to secure 
that systematic unity which is indispensable to reacon, and 



NATURAL DIALECTIC OF HUMAN REASON 557 

which while furthering in every way the empirical knowledge 
obtainable by the understanding can never interfere to hinder 
or obstruct it. 

We misapprehend the meaning of this idea if we regard 
it as the assertion or even as the assumption of a real thing, 
to which we may proceed to ascribe the ground of the sys- 
tematic order of the world. On the contrary, what this ground 
which eludes our concepts may be in its own inherent con- 
stitution is left entirely undetermined; the idea is posited only 
as being the point of view from which alone that unity, which 
is so essential to reason and so beneficial to the understand- 
ing, can be further extended. In short, this transcendental {g 710 
thing is only the schema of the regulative principle by which 
reason, so far as lies in its power, extends systematic unity 
over the whole field of experience. 

The first object of such an idea is the T itself, viewed 
simply as thinking nature or soul. If I am to investigate the 
properties with which a thinking being is in itself endowed, I 
must interrogate experience. For I cannot even apply any one 
of the categories to this object, except in so far as the schema 
of the category is given in sensible intuition. But I never there- 
by attain to a systematic unity of all appearances of inner sense. 
Instead, then, of the empirical concept (of that which the soul 
actually is), which cannot carry us far, reason takes the concept 
of the empirical unity of all thought; and by thinking this unity 
as unconditioned and original, it forms from it a concept of 
reason, that is, the idea of a simple substance, which, unchange- 
able in itself (personally identical), stands in association with 
other real things outside it; in a word, the idea of a simple self- 
subsisting intelligence. Yet in so doing it has nothing in view 
save principles of systematic unity in the explanation of the 
appearances of the soul. It is endeavouring to represent all 
determinations as existing in a single subject, all powers, so 
far as possible, as derived from a single fundamental power, all 
change as belonging to the states of one and the same per- 
manent being, and all appearances in space as completely dif- 
ferent from the actions of thought. The simplicity and other 
properties of substance are intended to be only the schema of 
this regulative principle, and are not presupposed as being the 
actual grpund of the properties of the soul.'For these may rest 



558 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

on altogether different grounds, of which we can know nothing. 
The soul in itself could not be known through these assumed 
predicates, not even if we regarded them as absolutely valid 
in respect of it. For they constitute a mere idea which cannot 
be represented in concrete. Nothing but advantage can result 
from the psychological idea thus conceived, if only we take 
heed that it is not viewed as more than a mere idea, and that 
it is therefore taken as valid only relatively to the systematic 
employment of reason in determining the appearances of our 
soul. For no empirical laws of bodily appearances, which are 
of a totally different kind, will then intervene in the explana- 
tion of what belongs exclusively to inner sense. No windy 
hypotheses of generation, extinction, and palingenesis of souls 
will be permitted. The consideration of this object of inner 
sense will thus be kept completely pure and will not be con- 
fused by the introduction of heterogeneous properties. Also, 
reason's investigations will be directed to reducing the grounds 
of explanation in this field, so far as may be possible, to a 
single principle. All this will be best attained through such a 
schema, viewed as if it were a real being; indeed it is attain- 
able in no other way. The psychological idea can signify 
nothing but the schema of a regulative concept. For were 
I to enquire whether the soul in itself is of spiritual nature, 
the question would have no meaning. In employing such a 
concept I not only abstract from corporeal nature, but from 
nature in general, that is, from all predicates of any possible 
experience, and therefore from all conditions requisite for 
thinking an object for such a concept; yet only as related to 
an object can the concept be said to have a meaning. 

The second regulative idea of merely speculative reason 
is the concept of the world in general. For nature is properly 
the only given object in regard to which reason requires regu- 
lative principles. This nature is twofold, either thinking or 
corporeal. To think the latter, so far as regards its inner 
possibility, that is, to determine the application of the cate- 
gories to it, we need no idea, that is, no representation which 
transcends experience. Nor, indeed, is any idea possible in this 
connection, since in dealing with corporeal nature we are 
guided solely by sensible intuition. The case is different from 
that of the fundamental psychological concept ('V), which 



NATURAL DIALECTIC OF HUMAN REASON 559 

contains a priori a certain form of thought, namely, the unity 
of thought. There therefore remains for pure reason nothing M 68 5 
but nature in general, and the completeness of the conditions 
in nature in accordance with some principle. The absolute 
totality of the series of these conditions, in the derivation of 
their members, is an idea which can never be completely 
realised in the empirical employment of reason, but which 
yet serves as a rule that prescribes how we ought to proceed 
in dealing with such series, namely, that in explaining appear- 
ances, whether in their regressive or in their ascending order, 
we ought to treat the series as if it were in itself infinite, that 
is, as if it proceeded in indefinitum. When, on the other hand, 
reason is itself regarded as the determining cause, as in [the 
sphere of] freedom, that is to say, in the case of practical prin- 
ciples, we have to proceed as if we had before us an object, not 
of the senses, but of the pure understanding. In this practical 
sphere the conditions are no longer in the series of appear- 
ances; they can be posited outside the series, and the series of 
states can therefore be regarded as if it had an absolute be- 
ginning, through an intelligible cause. All this shows that the 
Cosmological ideas are nothing but simply regulative prin- 
ciples, and are very far from positing, in the manner of con- 
stitutive principles, an actual totality of such series. The fuller 
treatment of this subject will be found in the chapter on the 
antinomy of pure reason. 

The third idea of pure reason, which contains a merely 
relative supposition of a being that is the sole and sufficient 
cause of all cosmological series, is the idea of God. We have 
not the slightest ground to assume in an absolute manner (to 
suppose in itself) the object of this idea; for what can enable 
us to believe in or assert a being of the highest perfection and 
one absolutely necessary by its very nature, merely on the basis 
of its concept, or if we did how could we justify our procedure? 
It is only by way of its relation to the world that we can attempt 
to establish the necessity of this supposition; and it then becomes 
evident that the idea of such a being, like all speculative ideas, 
seeks only to formulate the command of reason, that all con- 
nection in the world be viewed in accordance with the prin- 
ciples of a systematic unity as if all such connection had its 
source in.one single all-embracing being, aS the supreme and 



$6o KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

all-sufficient cause. It is thus evident that reason has here no 
other purpose than to prescribe its own formal rule for the 
extension of its empirical employment, and not any extension 
beyond all limits of empirical employment. Consequently it is 
evident that this idea does not, in any concealed fashion, in- 
volve any principle that claims, in its application to possible 
experience, to be constitutive in character. 

This highest formal unity, which rests solely on concepts 
of reason, is the purposive' 1 unity of things. The speculative 
interest of reason makes it necessary to regard all order in the 
world as if it had originated in the purpose 2 of a supreme 
reason. Such a principle opens out to our reason, as applied 
in the field of experience, altogether new views as to how the 
things of the world maybe connected according to teleological 3 
laws, and so enables it to arrive at their greatest systematic 
unity. The assumption of a supreme intelligence, as the one 
and only cause of the universe, though in the idea alone, can 
therefore always benefit reason and can never injure it. Thus 
if, in studying the shape of the earth (which is round, but some- 
what flattened)/ of the mountains, seas, etc., we assume it to be 
the outcome of wise purposes on the part of an Author of the 
world, we are enabled to make in this way a number of dis- 
coveries. And provided we restrict ourselves to a merely regu- 
lative use of this principle, even error cannot do us any serious 
harm. For the worst that can happen would be that where we 
expected a teleological connection (nexus finalis}, we find only 
B 7l6 | a mechanical or physical connection (nexus effectivus). In such 
a case, we merely fail to find the additional unity; we do not 
destroy the unity upon which reason insists in its empirical 

The advantage arising from the spherical shape of the earth 
is well known. But few are aware that its spheroidal flattening alone 
prevents the continental elevations, or even the smaller hills, thrown 
up perhaps by earthquakes, from continuously, and indeed quite 
appreciably in a comparatively short time, altering the position of 
the axis of the earth. The protuberance of the earth at the equator 
forms so vast a mountain that the impetus of all the other moun- 
tains can never produce any observable effect in changing the posi- 
tion of the earth's axis. And yet, wise as this arrangement is, we feel 
no scruples in explaining it from the equilibrium of the formerly 
fluid mass of the earth. 

1 \zweckrnas sige.] " * [Absicht.] * [teleologischen.} 



NATURAL DIALECTIC OF HUMAN REASON 561 

employment. But even a disappointment of this sort cannot 
affect the teleological law itself, in its general bearing. For 
although an anatomist can be convicted of error when he 
assigns to some member of an animal body an end x which 
it can be clearly shown not to subserve, it is yet quite im- 
possible to prove in any given case that an arrangement 
of nature, be it what it may, subserves no end whatsoever. 
Accordingly, medical physiology extends its very limited em- 
pirical knowledge of the ends served by the articulation of an 
organic body, by resorting to a principle for which pure reason 
has alone been responsible; and it carries this principle so far as 
to assume confidently, and with general approval, that every- 
thing in an animal has its use, and subserves some good pur- 
pose. If this assumption be treated as constitutive it goes much 
further than observation has thus far been able to justify; and 
we must therefore conclude that it is nothing more than a 
regulative principle of reason, to aid us in securing the highest 
possible systematic unity, by means of the idea of the pur- 
posive causality of the supreme cause of the world as if this 
being, as supreme intelligence, acting in accordance with a 
supremely wise purpose, were the cause of all things. 

If, however, we overlook this restriction of the idea to a 
merely regulative use, reason is led away into mistaken paths. 
For it then leaves the ground of experience, which alone can 
contain the signs that mark out its proper course, and ventures 
out beyond it to the incomprehensible and unsearchable, 
rising to dizzy heights where it finds itself entirely cut off 
from all possible action in conformity with experience. 

The first error which arises from our using the idea of a 
supreme being in a manner contrary to the nature of an idea, 
that is, constitutively, and not regulatively only, is the error of 
ignava ratio? We may so entitle every principle which makes 

a This was the title given by the ancient dialecticians to a 
sophistical argument, which ran thus: If it is your fate to recover 
from this illness, you will recover, whether you employ a physician 
or not. Cicero states that this mode of argument has been so named, 
because, if we conformed to it, reason would be left without any use 
in life. On the same ground I apply the name also to the sophistical 
argument of pure reason. 

1 [Zwcck.] 



562 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

us regard our investigation into nature, on any subject, as 
B 7?s} a bsolutely complete, disposing reason to cease from further 
enquiry, as if it had entirely succeeded in the task which it had 
set itself. Thus the psychological idea, when it is employed as 
a constitutive principle to explain the appearances of our soul, 
and thereby to extend our knowledge of the self beyond the 
limits of experience (its state after death), does indeed simplify 
the task of reason; but it interferes with, and entirely ruins, 
our use of reason in dealing with nature under the guidance 
of our experiences. The dogmatic spiritualist explains the 
abiding and unchanging unity of a person throughout all 
change of state, by the unity of the thinking substance, of 
which, as he believes, he has immediate perception in the T; 
or he explains the interest which we take in what can happen 
only after our death, by means of our consciousness of the im- 
material nature of the thinking subject; and so forth. He thus 
dispenses with all empirical investigation of the cause of these 
inner appearances, so far as that cause is to be found in physi- 
cal grounds of explanation; and to his own great convenience, 
though at the sacrifice of all real insight, he professes, in re- 
liance upon the assumed authority of a transcendent reason, to 
have the right to ignore those sources of knowledge which are 
immanent in experience. These detrimental consequences are 
even more obvious in the dogmatic treatment of our idea of a 
supreme intelligence, and in the theological system of nature 
(physico-theology) which is falsely based upon it. For in 
this field of enquiry, if instead of looking for causes in the 
universal laws of material mechanism, we appeal directly to 
the unsearchable decree of supreme wisdom, all those ends 
which are exhibited in nature, together with the many ends 
which are only ascribed by us to nature, make our investi- 
gation of the causes a very easy task, and so enable us to 
regard the labour of reason as completed, when, as a matter 
of fact, we have merely dispensed with its employment an 
employment which is wholly dependent for guidance upon the 
order of nature and the series of its alterations, in accordance 
with the universal laws which they are found to exhibit. 1 This 
error can be avoided, if we consider from the teleological point 
of view not merely certain parts of nature, such as the distribu- 

1 \nach ihren inneren und allgemeinen Gesetzen.] * 



NATURAL DIALECTIC OF HUMAN REASON 563 

tion of land, its structure, the constitution and location of 
the mountains, or only the organisation of the vegetable and 
animal kingdoms, but make this systematic unity of nature 
completely universal, in relation to the idea of a supreme in- 
telligence. For we then treat nature as resting upon a purpos- 
iveness, in accordance with universal laws, from which no 
special arrangement is exempt, however difficult it may be to 
establish this in any given case. We then have a regulative 
principle of the systematic unity of teleological connection 
a connection which we do not, however, predetermine. What 
we may presume to do is to follow out the physico-mechanical (3 
connection in accordance with universal laws, in the hope of 
discovering what the teleological connection actually is. In this 
way alone can the principle of purposive unity aid always in 
extending the employment of reason in reference to experience, 
without being in any instance prejudicial to it. 

The second error arising from the misapprehension of the 
above principle of systematic unity is that of perversa ratio 
(y&lt;TTpov TrpoTepov). The idea of systematic unity should be 
used only as a regulative principle to guide us in seeking for 
Such unity in the connection of things, according to universal 
laws of nature; and we ought, therefore, to believe that we 
have approximated to completeness in the employment of the 
principle only in proportion as we are in a position to verify 
such unity in empirical fashion a completeness which is 
never, of course, attainable. Instead of this the reverse pro- 
cedure is adopted. The reality of a principle of purposive 
unity is not only presupposed but hypostatised; and since the 
concept of a supreme intelligence is in itself completely be- 
yond our powers of comprehension, we proceed to determine 
it in an anthropomorphic manner, and so to impose ends 
upon nature, forcibly and dictatorially, instead of pursuing 
the more reasonable course of searching for them by the path 
of physical investigation. And thus teleology, which is in- 
tended to aid us merely in completing the unity of nature in 
accordance with universal laws, not only tends to abrogate 
such unity, but also prevents reason from carrying out its own 
professed purpose, that of proving from nature, in conformity 
with these laws, 1 the existence of a supreme intelligent cause. 

* [Reading, with Wille, nock diesen for nock diesem.] 



564 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

For if the most complete purposiveness cannot be presupposed 
a priori in nature, that is, as belonging to its essence, how can 
we be required to search for it, and through all its gradations 
to approximate to the supreme perfection of an Author of all 
things, a perfection that, as absolutely necessary, must be 
knowable a priorit The regulative principle prescribes that 
systematic unity as a unity in nature, which is not known 
merely empirically but is presupposed a priori (although in 
an indeterminate manner), be presupposed absolutely, and 
consequently as following from the essence of things. If, 
however, I begin with a supreme purposive being as the 
ground of all things, the unity of nature is really surrendered, 
as being quite foreign and accidental to the nature of things, 
and as not capable of being known from its own universal laws. 
There then arises a vicious circle; we are assuming just that 
very point which is mainly in dispute. 

To take the regulative principle of the systematic unity of 
nature as being a constitutive principle, and to hypostatise, and 
presuppose as a cause, that which serves, merely in idea, as the 
B 722} g roun d of the consistent employment of reason, is simply to 
confound reason. The investigation of nature takes its own 
independent course, keeping to the chain of natural causes 
in conformity with their universal laws. It does indeed, in so 
doing, proceed in accordance with the idea of an Author of the 
universe, but not in order to deduce therefrom the purposive- 
ness for which it is ever on the watch, but in order to obtain 
knowledge of the existence of such an Author from this pur- 
posiveness. And by seeking this purposiveness in the essence 
of the things of nature, and so far as may be possible in the 
essence of things in general, it seeks to know the existence of 
this supreme being as absolutely necessary. Whether this latter 
enterprise succeed or not, the idea remains always true in itself, 
and justified in its use, provided it be restricted to the condi- 
tions of a merely regulative principle. 

Complete purposive unity constitutes what is, in the ab- 
solute sense, perfection. If we do not find this unity in the 
essence of the things which go to constitute the entire object of 
experience, that is, of all our objectively valid knowledge, and 
therefore do not find it in the universal and necessary laws of 
nature, how can v^e profess to infer directly from this unity the 



NATURAL DIALECTIC OF HUMAN REASON 565 

idea of a supreme and absolutely necessary perfection of an 
original being, as the source of all causality? The greatest pos- 
sible systematic unity, and consequently also purposive unity, is 
the training school for the use of reason, and is indeed the very 
foundation of the possibility of its greatest possible employ- 
ment. The idea of such unity is, therefore, inseparably bound |g 
up with the very nature of our reason. This same idea is on 
that account legislative for us; and it is therefore very natural 
that we should assume a corresponding legislative reason 
(intellectus archetypus), from which, as the object of our reason, 
all systematic unity of nature is to be derived. 

In discussing the antinomy of pure reason we have stated 
that the questions propounded by pure reason must in every 
case admit of an answer, and that in their regard it is not per- 
missible to plead the limits of our knowledge (a plea which 
iri many questions that concern nature is as unavoidable as 
it is relevant). For we are not here asking questions in regard 
to the nature of things, but only such questions as arise from 
the very nature of reason, and which concern solely its own 
inner constitution. We are now in a position to confirm this 
a'ssertion which at first sight may have appeared rash so 
far as regards the two questions in which pure reason is most 
of all interested; and thus finally to complete our discussion of 
the dialectic of pure reason. 

If, in connection with a transcendental theology,* we ask, 
first } whether there is anything distinct from the world, which j 
contains the ground of the order of the world and of its con- 
nection in accordance with universal laws, the answer is that 
there undoubtedly is. For the world is a sum of appearances; 
and there must therefore be some transcendental ground of 
the appearances, that is, a ground which is thinkable only by 
the pure understanding. If, secondly, the question be, whether 
this being is substance, of the greatest reality, necessary, etc., 

a After what I have already said regarding the psychological 
idea and its proper vocation, as a principle for the merely regulative (B 724 
employment of reason, I need not dwell at any length upon the 
transcendental illusion by which the systematic unity of all the mani- 
foldness of inner sense is hypostatised. The procedure is very similar 
to that which is under discussion in our criticism of the theological 
ideal. 



566 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

we reply that this question is entirely without meaning. For 
all categories through which we can attempt to form a concept 
of such an object allow only of empirical employment, and 
have no meaning whatsoever when not applied to objects of 
possible experience, that is, to the world of sense. Outside this 
field they are merely titles of concepts, which we may admit, 
but through which [in and by themselves] we can understand 
nothing. If, thirdly, the question be, whether we may not at 
least think this being, which is distinct from the world, in 
analogy with the objects of experience, the answer is: cer- 

B 725} tainl y&gt; but onl y as object in idea and not in reality, namely, 
only as being a substratum, to us unknown, of the systematic 
unity, order, and purposiveness of the arrangement of the 
world an idea which reason is constrained to form as the 
regulative principle of its investigation of nature. Nay, more, 
we may freely, without laying ourselves open to censure, admit 
into this idea certain anthropomorphisms which are helpful 
to the principle in its regulative capacity. For it is always an 
idea only, which does not relate directly to a being distinct 
from the world, but to the regulative principle of the systematic 
unity of the world, and only by means of a schema of thfs 
unity, namely, through the schema of a supreme intelligence 
which, in originating the world, acts in accordance with wise 
purposes. What this primordial ground of the unity of the 
world may be in itself, we should not profess to have thereby 
decided, but only how we should use it, or rather its idea, in 
relation to the systematic employment of reason in respect of 
the things of the world. 

But the question may still be pressed: Can we, on such 
grounds, assume a wise and omnipotent Author of the world? 
Undoubtedly we may; and we not only may, but must, do so. 
But do we then extend our knowledge beyond the field of pos- 
sible experience? By no means. All that we have done is merely 

B 725} to presuppose a something, a merely transcendental object, of 
which, as it is in itself, we have no concept whatsoever. It is 
only in relation to the systematic and purposive ordering of 
the world, which, if we are to study nature, we are constrained 
to presuppose, that we have thought this unknown being 
by analogy with an intelligence (an empirical concept); that 
is, have endowed it, in respect of the ends and perfection 



NATURAL DIALECTIC OF HUMAN REASON 567 

which are to be grounded upon it, with just those properties 
which, in conformity with the conditions of our reason, can 
be regarded as containing the ground of such systematic unity. 
This idea is thus valid only in respect of the employment of our 
reason in reference to the world. If we ascribed to it a validity 
that is absolute and objective, we should be forgetting that 
what we are thinking is a being in idea only; and in thus taking 
our start from a ground which is not determinable through 
observation of the world, we should no longer be in a position 
to apply the principle in a manner suited to the empirical 
employment of reason. 

But, it will still be asked, can I make any such use of the 
concept and of the presupposition of a supreme being in the 
rational consideration of the world ? Yes, it is precisely for 
this purpose that reason has resorted to this idea. But may I 
then proceed to regard seemingly purposive arrangements as 
purposes, 1 and so derive them from the divine will, though, 
of course, mediately through certain special natural means, 
themselves established in furtherance of that divine will? Yes, 
we can indeed do so; but only on condition that we regard 
ft as a matter of indifference whether it be asserted that 
divine wisdom has disposed all things in accordance with its 
supreme ends, or that the idea of supreme wisdom is a regu- 
lative principle in the investigation of nature and a principle 
of its systematic and purposive unity, in accordance with 
universal laws, even in those cases in which we are unable 
to detect that unity. In other words, it must be a matter of 
complete indifference to us, when we perceive such unity, 
whether we say that God in his wisdom has willed it to be 
so, or that nature has wisely arranged it thus. For what has 
justified us in adopting the idea of a supreme intelligence as 
a schema of the regulative principle is precisely this greatest 
possible systematic and purposive unity a unity which our 
reason has required as a regulative principle that must under- 
lie all investigation of nature. The more, therefore, we dis- 
cover purposiveness in the world, the more fully is the legiti- 
macy of our idea confirmed. But since the sole aim of that 
principle was to guide us in seeking a necessary unity of nature, 
and that in the greatest possible degree, while we do indeed, 

1 \tweckdhnliche Anordnungen als Absichten] 



568 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

in so far as we attain that unity, owe it to the idea of a supreme 
B 723} keing, we cannot, without contradicting ourselves, ignore the 
universal laws of nature with a view to discovering which the 
idea was alone adopted and look upon this purposiveness 
of nature as contingent and hyperphysical in its origin. For we 
were not justified in assuming above nature a being with those 
qualities, but only in adopting the idea of such a being in order 
to view the appearances 1 as systematically connected with one 
another in accordance with the principle of a causal deter- 
mination. 

For the same reasons, in thinking the cause of the world, 
we are justified in representing it in our idea not only in 
terms of a certain subtle anthropomorphism (without which 
we could not think anything whatsoever in regard to it), 
namely, as a being that has understanding, feelings of pleasure 
and displeasure, and desires and volitions corresponding to 
these, but also in ascribing to it a perfection which, as infinite, 
far transcends any perfection that our empirical knowledge of 
the order of the world can justify us in attributing to it. For 
the regulative law of systematic unity prescribes that we should 
study nature as if systematic and purposive unity, combined 
with the greatest possible manifoldness, were everywhere to be 
met with, in infinitum. For although we may succeed in dis- 
covering but little of this perfection of the world, it is never- 
theless required by the legislation of our reason that we must 
B 720} a ^ wa Y s searc h f r an d surmise it; and it must always be bene- 
ficial, and can never be harmful, to direct our investigations 
into nature in accordance with this principle. But it is evident 
that in this way of representing the principle as involving the 
idea of a supreme Author, I do not base the principle upon the 
existence and upon the knowledge of such a being, but upon 
its idea only, and that I do not really derive anything from this 
being, but only from the idea of it that is, from the nature of 
the things of the world, in accordance with such an idea. A 
certain, unformulated consciousness of the true use of this 
concept of reason seems indeed to have inspired the modest 
and reasonable language of the philosophers of all times, 
since they speak of the wisdom and providence of nature and 
of divine wisdom, just as if nature and divine wisdom were 

1 [Reading, with Hartenstein, die for der.] 



NATURAL DIALECTIC OF HUMAN REASON 569 

equivalent expressions indeed, so long as they are dealing 
solely with speculative reason, giving preference to the former 
mode of expression, on the ground that it enables us to avoid 
making profession of more than we are justified in asserting, 
and that it likewise directs reason to its own proper field, 
namely, nature. 

Thus pure reason, which at first seemed to promise nothing 
less than the extension of knowledge beyond all limits of ex- 
perience, contains, if properly understood, nothing but regu- 
lative principles, which, while indeed prescribing greater unity 
than the empirical employment of understanding can achieve, 
yet still, by the very fact that they place the goal of its 
endeavours at so great a distance, carry its agreement with {3730 
itself, by means of systematic unity, to the highest possible 
degree. But if, on the other hand, they be misunderstood, 
and be treated as constitutive principles of transcendent 
knowledge, they give rise, by a dazzling and deceptive 
illusion, to persuasion and a merely fictitious knowledge, 
and therewith to contradictions and eternal disputes. 



Thus all human knowledge begins with intuitions, pro- 
ceeds from thence to concepts, and ends with ideas. Although 
in respect of all three elements it possesses a priori sources of 
knowledge, which on first consideration seem to scorn the 
limits of all experience, a thoroughgoing critique convinces us 
that reason, in its speculative employment, can never with 
these elements transcend the field of possible experience, and 
that the proper vocation of this supreme faculty of knowledge 
is to use all methods, and the principles of these methods, 
solely for the purpose of penetrating to the innermost secrets 
of nature, in accordance with every possible principle of unity 
that of ends being the most important but never to soar 
beyond its limits, outside which there is for us nothing but 
empty space. The critical examination, as carried out in the 
Transcendental Analytic, of all propositions which may seem j 73 
to extend our knowledge beyond actual experience, has doubt- 
less sufficed to convince us that they can never lead to any- 
thing more than a possible experience. Were it not that we are 
suspicious of abstract and general doctriAes, however clear, 



570 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

and were it not that specious and alluring prospects tempt us 
to escape from the compulsion which these doctrines impose, 
we might have been able to spare ourselves the laborious in- 
terrogation of all those dialectical witnesses that a transcen- 
dent reason brings forward in support of its pretensions. For 
we should from the start have known with complete certainty 
that all such pretensions, while perhaps honestly meant, must 
be absolutely groundless, inasmuch as they relate to a kind 
of knowledge to which man can never attain. But there is no 
end to such discussions, unless we can penetrate to the true 
cause of the illusion by which even the wisest are deceived. 
Moreover, the resolution of all our transcendent knowledge 
into its elements (as a study of our inner nature) is in itself 
of no slight value, and to the philosopher is indeed a matter 
of duty. Accordingly, fruitless as are all these endeavours of 
speculative reason, we have none the less found it necessary 
to follow them up to their primary sources. And since the 
dialectical illusion does not merely deceive us in our judg- 
B 732 ments, but also, because of the interest which we take in these 
A 704 judgments, has a certain natural attraction which it will always 
continue to possess, we have thought it advisable, with a view 
to the prevention of such errors in the future, to draw up in 
full detail what we may describe as being the records of this 
lawsuit, and to deposit them in the archives of human reason. 



II 

TRANSCENDENTAL DOCTRINE OF 
METHOD 



571 



TRANSCENDENTAL DOCTRINE OF METHOD 

IF we look upon the sum of all knowledge of pure speculative { 77 
reason as an edifice for which we have at least the idea within 
ourselves, it can be said that in the Transcendental Doctrine 
of Elements we have made an estimate of the materials, and 
have determined for what sort of edifice and for what height 
and strength of building they suffice. We have found, in- 
deed, that although we had contemplated building a tower 
which should reach to the heavens, the supply of materials 
suffices only for a dwelling-house, just sufficiently commodious 
for our business on the level of experience, and just sufficiently 
high to allow of our overlooking it. The bold undertaking that 
we had designed is thus bound to fail through lack of material 
not to mention the babel of tongues, which inevitably gives 
rise to disputes among the workers in regard to the plan to be 
followed, and which must end by scattering them over all the 
world, leaving each to erect a separate building for himself, 
according to his own design. At present, however, we are con- 
cerned not so much with the materials as with the plan; and 
inasmuch as we have been warned not to venture at random 
upon a blind project which may be altogether beyond our 
capacities, and yet cannot well abstain from building a secure 
home for ourselves, we must plan our building in conformity 
with the material which is given to us, and which is also at 
the same time appropriate to our needs. 

I understand, therefore, by Transcendental Doctrine of 
Method the determination of the formal conditions of a com- 
plete system of pure reason. In this connection, we shall have 
to treat of a discipline^ a canon, an architectonic ', and finally 
a history of pure reason, and to provide (in its transcendental 
reference) what, in relation to the use of the understanding 
in general, the Schools have attempted, th6ugh very unsatis- 

573 



574 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

factorily, under the title of &amp; practical logic. For since universal 
logic is not confined to any particular kind of knowledge made 
possible by the understanding (for instance, not to its pure 
knowledge) and is also not confined to certain objects, it cannot, 
save by borrowing knowledge from other sciences, do more 
than present the titles of possible methods and the technical 
terms which are used for purposes of systematisation in all 
kinds of sciences; and this serves only to acquaint the novice 
in advance with names the meaning and use of which he will 
not learn till later. 



TRANSCENDENTAL DOCTRINE OF METHOD 
CHAPTER I 

THE DISCIPLINE OF PURE REASON 

Owing to the general desire for knowledge, negative judg- 
ments, that is, those which are such not merely as regards their 
form but also as regards their content, are not held in any very 
high esteem. They are regarded rather as the jealous enemies 
B 737} ^ our unceasm endeavour to extend our knowledge, and it 
almost requires an apology to win for them even tolerance, not 
to say favour and high repute. 

As far as logical form is concerned, we can make negative 
any proposition we like; but in respect to the content of our 
knowledge in general, which is either extended or limited by 
a judgment, the task peculiar to negative judgments is that of 
rejecting error. Accordingly, negative propositions intended to 
reject false knowledge, where yet no error is possible, are indeed 
true but empty, that is, are not suited to their purpose, and 
just for this reason are often quite absurd, like the proposition 
of the Schoolman, that Alexander could not have conquered 
any countries without an army. 

But where the limits of our possible knowledge are very 
narrow, where the temptation to judge is great, where the illu- 
sion that besets us is very deceptive and the harm that results 
from the error is considerable, there the negative instruction, 
which serves solely to guard us from errors, has even more 
importance than i many a piece of positive information by 



THE DISCIPLINE OF PURE REASON 575 

which our knowledge is increased. The compulsion, by which 
the constant tendency to disobey certain rules is restrained and 
finally extirpated, we entitle discipline. It is distinguished 
from culture, which is intended solely to give a certain kind 
of skill, and not to cancel any habitual mode of action already 
present. Towards the development of a talent, which has al- 
ready in itself 1 an impulse to manifest itself, discipline will 
therefore contribute in a negative," culture and doctrine in a 
positive, fashion. 

That temperament and our various talents (such as imagi- 
nation and wit) which incline to allow themselves a free and 
unlimited activity are in many respects in need of a discipline, 
everyone will readily admit. But that reason, whose proper 
duty it is to prescribe a discipline for all other endeavours, 
should itself stand in need of such discipline may indeed seem 
strange; and it has, in fact, hitherto escaped this humiliation, 
only because, in view of its stately guise and established stand- 
ing, nobody could lightly come to suspect it of idly substituting 
fancies for concepts, and words for things. 

There is no need of a critique of reason in its empirical em- 
ployment, because in this field its principles are always sub- 
ject to the test of experience. Nor is it needed in mathematics, 
where the concepts of reason must be forthwith exhibited in 
concrete in pure intuition, so that everything unfounded and 
arbitrary in them is at once exposed. But where neither em- 
pirical nor pure intuition keeps reason to a visible track, when, 
that is to say, reason is being considered in its transcendental 
employment, in accordance with mere concepts, it stands so 
greatly in need of a discipline, to restrain its tendency towards 
extension beyond the narrow limits of possible experience and 
to guard it against extravagance and error, that the whole 

a I am well aware that in the terminology of the Schools the title 
discipline is commonly used as synonymous with instruction. How- 
ever, there are so many other cases where discipline in the sense of 
training by constraint is carefully distinguished from instruction in 
the sense of teaching, and the very nature of things itself makes it so 
imperative that we should preserve the only expressions suitable for 
this distinction, that it is desirable that the former term should never 
be used in any but the negative sense. 

1 [Reading, with Erdmann, von sick twuor sick.} 



576 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

philosophy of pure reason has no other than this strictly 
negative utility. Particular errors can be got rid of by censure, 
and their causes by criticism. But where, as in the case of pure 
reason, we come upon a whole system of illusions and fallacies, 
intimately bound together and united under common prin- 
ciples, a quite special negative legislation seems to be required, 
erecting a system of precautions and self-examination under 
the title of a discipline, founded on the nature of reason and 
the objects of its pure employment a system in face of 
which no pseudo-rational illusion will be able to stand, but 
will at once betray itself, no matter what claims it may ad- 
vance for exceptional treatment. 

B 740} ^ ut fr ls we ^ to note ^at m *kis second main division of the 
transcendental Critique the discipline of pure reason is not 
directed to the content but only to the method of knowledge 
through pure reason. The former has already been considered 
in the Doctrine of Elements. But there is so much similarity in 
the mode of employing reason, whatever be the object to which 
it is applied, while yet, at the same time, its transcendental 
employment is so essentially different from every other, that 
without the admonitory negative teaching of a discipline? 
specially devised for the purpose, we cannot hope to avoid 
the errors which inevitably arise from pursuing in improper 
fashion methods which are indeed suitable to reason in other 
fields, only not in this transcendental sphere. 



CHAPTER I 

Section I 

THE DISCIPLINE OF PURE REASON IN ITS DOGMATIC 
EMPLOYMENT 

Mathematics presents the most splendid example of the suc- 
cessful extension of pure reason, without the help of experience. 
Examples are contagious, especially as they quite naturally 
flatter a faculty which has been successful in one field, [leading 
it] to expect the same good fortune in other fields. Thus pure 
B 741} reason hopes to be able to extend its domain as successfully 
and securely in itstranscendental as in its mathematical em- 



THE DISCIPLINE OF PURE REASON 577 

ployment, especially when it resorts to the same method as 
has been of such obvious utility in mathematics. It is therefore 
highly important for us to know whether the method of attain- 
ing apodeictic certainty which is called mathematical is identi- 
cal with the method by which we endeavour to obtain the 
same certainty in philosophy, and which in that field would 
have to be called dogmatic. 

Philosophical knowledge is the knowledge gained by reason 
from concepts', mathematical knowledge is the knowledge 
gained by reason from the construction of concepts. To con- 
struct a concept means to exhibit a priori the intuition which 
corresponds to the concept. For the construction of a concept 
we therefore need a non-empirical intuition. The latter must, 
as intuition, be a single object, and yet none the less, as the 
construction of a concept (a universal representation), it must 
ir? its representation express universal validity for all possible 
intuitions which fall under the same concept. Thus I construct 
a triangle by representing the object which corresponds to this 
concept either by imagination alone, in pure intuition, or in 
accordance therewith also on paper, in empirical intuition in 
both cases completely a priori^ without having borrowed the 
pattern from any experience. The single figure which we draw 
is empirical, and yet it serves to express the concept, without 
impairing its universality. For in this empirical intuition we 
consider only the act whereby we construct the concept, and 
abstract from the many determinations (for instance, the mag- 
nitude of the sides and of the angles), which are quite indif- 
ferent, as not altering the concept 'triangle'. 

Thus philosophical knowledge considers the particular 
only in the universal, mathematical knowledge the universal 
in the particular, or even in the single instance, though still 
always a priori and by means of reason. Accordingly, just as 
this single object is determined by certain universal conditions 
of construction, so the object of the concept, to which the single 
object corresponds merely as its schema, must likewise be 
thought as universally determined. 

The essential difference between these two kinds of know- 
ledge through reason consists therefore in this formal differ- 
ence, and does not depend on difference of their material or 
objects. Those who propose to distinguish philosophy from 

2 P 



578 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

mathematics by saying that the former has as its object quality 
only and the latter quantity only, have mistaken the effect for 
the cause. The form of mathematical knowledge is the cause 
why it is limited exclusively to quantities. For it is the concept 
of quantities only that allows of being constructed, that is, ex- 

B 743} hibited a priori in intuition; whereas qualities cannot be pre- 
sented in any intuition that is not empirical. Consequently 
reason can obtain a knowledge of qualities only through con- 
cepts. No one can obtain an intuition corresponding to the con- 
cept of reality otherwise than from experience; we can never 
come into possession of it a priori out of our own resources, 
and prior to the empirical consciousness of reality. The shape 
of a cone we can form for ourselves in intuition, unassisted by 
any experience, according to its concept alone, but the colour 
of this cone must be previously given in some experience or 
other. I cannot represent in intuition the concept of a cause 
in general except in an example supplied by experience; and 
similarly with other concepts. Philosophy, as well as mathe- 
matics, does indeed treat of quantities, for instance, of totality, 
infinity, etc. Mathematics also concerns itself with qualities, 
for instance, the difference between lines and surfaces, as 
spaces of different quality, and with the continuity of extension 
as one of its qualities. But although in such cases they have a 
common object, the mode in which reason handles that object 
is wholly different in philosophy and in mathematics. Philo- 
sophy confines itself to universal concepts; mathematics can 
achieve nothing by concepts alone but hastens at once to intui- 
tion, in which it considers the concept in concrete, though not 

B 744} empirically, but only in an intuition which it presents a priori ', 
that is, which it has constructed, and in which whatever follows 
from the universal conditions of the construction must be uni- 
versally valid of the object of the concept thus constructed. 

Suppose a philosopher be given the concept of a triangle 
and he be left to find out, in his own way, what relation the 
sum of its angles bears to a right angle. He has nothing 
but the concept of a figure enclosed by three straight lines, 
and possessing three angles. However long he meditates on 
this concept, he will never produce anything new. He can 
analyse and clarify the concept of a straight line or of an angle 
or of the number three, but he can never arrive at a*iy proper- 



THE DISCIPLINE OF PURE REASON 579 

ties not already contained in these concepts. Now let the geo- 
metrician take up these questions. He at once begins by con- 
structing a triangle. Since he knows that the sum of two right 
angles is exactly equal to the sum of all the adjacent angles 
which can be constructed from a single point on a straight line, 
he prolongs one side of his triangle and obtains two adjacent 
angles, which together are equal to two right angles. He then 
divides the external angle by drawing a line parallel to the 
opposite side of the triangle, and observes that he has thus ob- 
tained an external adjacent angle which is equal to an internal 
angle and so on. In this fashion, through a chain of in- |g 
ferences guided throughout by intuition, he arrives at a fully 
evident and universally valid solution of the problem. 

But mathematics does not only construct magnitudes 
(quanta) as in geometry; it also constructs magnitude as such 
(qpantitas), as in algebra In this it abstracts completely from 
the properties of the object that is to be thought in terms of 
such a concept of magnitude. It then chooses a certain nota- 
tion for all constructions of magnitude as such (numbers), 1 
that is, for addition, subtraction, extraction of roots, etc. Once 
if* has distinguished in the universal concept of magnitudes the 
different relations in which the magnitudes may stand, it ex- 
hibits in intuition, in accordance with certain universal rules, 
all the various operations through which the quantities are 
produced and modified. When, for instance, one quantity is to 
be divided by another, their symbols are placed together, in 
accordance with the sign for division, and similarly in the other 
processes; and thus in algebra by means of a symbolic construc- 
tion, just as in geometry by means of an ostensive construction 
(the geometrical construction of the objects themselves), we 
succeed in arriving at results which discursive knowledge 
could never have reached by means of mere concepts. 

Now what can be the reason of this radical difference in 
the fortunes of the philosopher and the mathematician, both 
of whom practise the art of reason, the one making his way by 
means of concepts, the other by means of intuitions which he 
exhibits a priori in accordance with concepts? The cause is 
evident from what has been said above, in our exposition of the 

1 [Reading, with Hartenstein and Erdmann (Zahlen)^ als . . . Wurzeln usw. 
for (Zahlen, Als . . . Subtraktion usw).] 



S8o KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

fundamental transcendental doctrines. We are not here con- 
cerned with analytic propositions, which can be produced by 
mere analysis of concepts (in this the philosopher would 
certainly have the advantage over his rival), but with syn- 
thetic propositions, and indeed with just those synthetic 
propositions that can be known a priori. For I must not 
restrict my attention to what I am actually thinking in my 
concept of a triangle (this is nothing more than the mere 
definition); I must pass beyond it to properties which are 
not contained in this concept, but yet belong to it. Now 
this is impossible unless I determine my object in accord- 
ance with the conditions either of empirical or of pure 
intuition. The former would only give us an empirical pro- 
position (based on the measurement of the angles), which 
would not have universality, still less necessity; and so would 
not at all serve our purpose. The second method of procedure 
is the mathematical one, and in this case is the method of geo- 
metrical construction, by means of which I combine in a pure 
intuition (just as I do in empirical intuition) the manifold 
which belongs to the schema of a triangle in general, and 
therefore to its concept. It is by this method that universal 
synthetic propositions must be constructed. 

It would therefore be quite futile for me to philosophise 
upon the triangle, that is, to think about it discursively. I 
B 747 j should not be able to advance a single step beyond the mere 
definition, which was what I had to begin with. There is indeed 
a transcendental synthesis [framed] from concepts alone, a 
synthesis with which the philosopher is alone competent to 
deal; but it relates only to a thing in general, as defining the 
conditions under which the perception of it can belong 'to 
possible experience. But in mathematical problems there is 
no question of this, nor indeed of existence at all, but only of 
the properties of the objects in themselves, [that is to say], 
solely in so far as these properties are connected with the con- 
cept of the objects. 

In the above example we have endeavoured only to make 
clear the great difference which exists between the discursive 
employment of reason in accordance with concepts and its 
intuitive employment by means of the construction of concepts. 
This naturally leaHs on to the question, what can be the cause 



THE DISCIPLINE OF PURE REASON 581 

which necessitates such a twofold employment of reason, and 
how we are to recognise whether it is the first or the second 
method that is being employed. 

All our knowledge relates, finally, to possible intuitions, 
for it is through them alone that an object is given. Now an a 
priori concept, that is, a concept which is not empirical, either 
already includes in itself a pure intuition (and if so, it can 
be constructed), or it includes nothing but the synthesis of 
possible intuitions which are not given a priori. In this latter 
case we can indeed make use of it in forming synthetic a |g ? 2 
priori judgments, but only discursively in accordance with 
concepts, never intuitively through the construction of the 
concept. 

The only intuition that is given a priori is that of the mere 
form of appearances, space and time. A concept of space and 
time, as quanta, can be exhibited a priori in intuition, that is, 
constructed, either in respect of the quality (figure) of the 
quanta, or through number in their quantity only (the mere 
synthesis of the homogeneous manifold). But the matter of 
appearances, by which things are given us in space and time, 
can only be represented in perception, and therefore a poste- 
riori. The only concept which represents a priori this empirical 
content of appearances is the concept of a thing in general, 
and the a priori synthetic knowledge of this thing in general 
can give us nothing more than the mere rule of the synthesis 
of that which perception may give a posteriori. It can never 
yield an a priori intuition of the real object, since this must 
necessarily be empirical. 

Synthetic propositions in regard to things in general, the 
intuition of which does not admit of being given a priori, are 
transcendental. Transcendental propositions can never be 
given through construction of concepts, but only in accordance 
with concepts that are a priori. They contain nothing but the 
rule according to which we are to seek empirically for a certain 
synthetic unity of that which is incapable of intuitive repre- 
sentation a priori (that is, of perceptions). But these synthetic / 721 
principles cannot exhibit a priori any one of their concepts 
in a specific instance; they can only do this a posteriori, by 
means of experience, which itself is possible only in con- 
formity with these principles 



582 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

If we are to judge synthetically in regard to a concept, 
we must go beyond this concept and appeal to the intui- 
tion in which it is given. For should we confine ourselves to 
what is contained in the concept, the judgment would be 
merely analytic, serving only as an explanation of the thought, 
in terms of what is actually contained in it. But I can pass 
from the concept to the corresponding pure or empirical in- 
tuition, in order to consider it in that intuition in concrete, 
and so to know, either a priori or a posteriori, what are the 
properties of the object of the concept. The a priori method 
gives us our rational and mathematical knowledge through 
the construction of the concept, the a posteriori method our 
merely empirical (mechanical) knowledge, which is incapable 
of yielding necessary and apodeictic propositions. Thus I might 
analyse my empirical concept of gold without gaining anything 
more than merely an enumeration of everything that I actually 
think in using the word, thus improving the logical character 
of my knowledge but not in any way adding to it. But I take 
the material body, familiarly known by this name, and obtain 
perceptions by means of it; and these perceptions yield various 
propositions which are synthetic but empirical. When the con- 
cept is mathematical, as in the concept of a triangle, I am in a 
position to construct the concept, that is, to give it a priori in 
intuition, and in this way to obtain knowledge which is at once 
synthetic and rational. But if what is given me is the transcend- 
ental concept of a reality, substance, force, etc., it indicates 
neither an empirical nor a pure intuition, but only the synthesis 
of empirical intuitions, which, as being empirical, cannot be 
given a priori. And since the synthesis is thus unable to ad- 
vance a priori, beyond the concept, to the corresponding in- 
tuition, the concept cannot yield any determining synthetic 
proposition, but only a principle of the synthesis" of possible 

a With the concept of cause I do really go beyond the empirical 
concept of an event (something happening), yet I do not pass to the 
intuition which exhibits the concept of cause in concrete, but to the 
time-conditions in general, which in experience may be found to be 
in accord with this concept. I therefore proceed merely in accordance 
with concepts; I cannot proceed by means of the construction of 
concepts, since the concept is a rule of the synthesis of percep- 
tions, and the latter are not pure intuitions, and so do not permit of 
being given a priori* 



THE DISCIPLINE OF PURE REASON $$3 

empirical intuitions. A transcendental proposition is therefore 
synthetic knowledge through reason, in accordance with mere 
concepts; and it is discursive, in that while it is what alone 
makes possible any synthetic unity of empirical knowledge, it 
yet gives us no intuition a priori. 

There is thus a twofold employment of reason; and while 
the two modes of employment resemble each other in the uni- 
versality and a priori origin of their knowledge, in outcome 
they are very different. The reason is that in the [field of] 
appearance, in terms of which 1 all objects are given us, 
there are two elements, the form of intuition (space and time), 
which can be known and determined completely a priori, and 
the matter (the physical element) or content the latter signi- 
fying something which is met with in space and time and which 
therefore contains an existent 2 corresponding to sensation. 
In respect to this material element, which can never be given 
in any determinate fashion otherwise than empirically, we can 
hav^ nothing a priori except indeterminate concepts of the syn- 
thesis of possible sensations, in so far as they belong, in a pos- 
sible experience, to the unity of apperception. As regards the 
formal element, we can determine our concepts in a priori 
intuition, inasmuch as we create for ourselves, in space and 
time, through a homogeneous synthesis, the objects themselves 
these objects being viewed simply as quanta. The former 
method is called the employment of reason in accordance with 
concepts; in so employing it 3 we can do nothing more than bring 
appearances under concepts, according to their actual content. 
The concepts cannot be made determinate in this manner, 4 
save only empirically, that is, a posteriori (although always in 
accordance with these concepts as rules of an empirical syn- 
thesis). The other method is the employment of reason through 
the construction of concepts; and since the concepts here re- |g ?** 
late to an a priori intuition, they are for this very reason them- 
selves a priori and can be given in a quite determinate fashion 
in pure intuition, without the help of any empirical data. The 
consideration of everything which exists in space or time, in 
regard to the questions, whether and how far it is a quantum 

1 [als wodurch.] 8 [Dasein.] 

* [Reading, with Erdmann, in dem for indem.] 

, 4 [Reading, with Erdmann, dadurch for Karau/.] 



584 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

or not, whether we are to ascribe to it positive being or the ab- 
sence of such, how far this something occupying space or time 
is a primary substratum or a mere determination [of substance], 
whether there be a relation of its existence to some other ex- 
istence, as cause or effect, and finally in respect of its existence 
whether it is isolated or is in reciprocal relation to and depend- 
ence upon others these questions, as also the question of the 
possibility of this existence, its actuality and necessity, or the 
opposites of these, one and all belong altogether to knowledge 
obtained by reason from concepts, such knowledge being 
termed philosophical. But the determination of an intuition a 
priori in space (figure), the division of time (duration), or even 
just the knowledge of the universal element in the synthesis of 
one and the same thing in time and space, and the magnitude 
of an intuition that is thereby generated (number), all this is 
the work of reason through construction of concepts, and is 
called mathematical. 

The great success which attends reason in its mathematical 
employment quite naturally gives rise to the expectation that 
it, or at any rate its method, will have the same success in other 
fields as in that of quantity. For this method has the advantage 
B ^ I of being able to realise all its concepts in intuitions, which it 
can provide a priori^ and by which it becomes, so to speak, 
master of nature; whereas pure philosophy is all at sea when it 
seeks through a priori discursive concepts to obtain insight in 
regard to the natural world, being unable to intuit a priori 
(and thereby to confirm) their reality. Nor does there seem 
to be, on the part of the experts in mathematics, any lack 
of self-confidence as to this procedure or on the part of the 
vulgar of great expectations from their skill should they 
apply themselves to carry out their project. For, since they 
have hardly ever attempted to philosophise in regard to their 
mathematics (a hard task!), the specific difference between the 
two employments of reason has never so much as occurred to 
them. Current, empirical rules, which they borrow from ordin- 
ary consciousness, they treat as being axiomatic. In the ques- 
tion as to the source of the concepts of space and time they are 
not in the least interested, although it is precisely with these 
concepts (as the only original quanta) that they are themselves 
occupied. Similarly, they think it unnecessary to investigate 



THE DISCIPLINE OF PURE REASON 585 

the origin of the pure concepts of understanding and in so 
doing to determine the extent of their validity; they care only 
to make use of them. In all this they are entirely in the right, 
provided only they do not overstep the proper limits, that is, 
the limits of the natural world. But, unconsciously, they pass 
from the field of sensibility to the precarious ground of pure and 
even transcendental concepts, a ground (instabilis tellus, in- 
nabilis undo) that permits them neither to stand nor to swim, and 
where their hasty tracks are soon obliterated. In mathematics, 
on the other hand, their passage gives rise to a broad highway, 
which the latest posterity may still tread with confidence. 

We have made it our duty to determine, with exactitude 
and certainty, the limits of pure reason in its transcendental 
employment. But the pursuit of such transcendental know- 
ledge has this peculiarity, that in spite of the plainest and most 
urgent warnings men still allow themselves to be deluded by 
false hopes, and therefore to postpone the total abandonment 
of ;all proposed attempts to advance beyond the bounds of ex- 
perience into the enticing regions of the intellectual world. It 
therefore becomes necessary to cut away the last anchor of 
these fantastic hopes, that is, to show that the pursuit of the 
mathematical method cannot be of the least advantage in this 
kind of knowledge (unless it be in exhibiting more plainly 
the limitations of the method); and that mathematics 1 and 
philosophy, although in natural science they do, indeed, go 
hand in hand, are none the less so completely different, that 
the procedure of the one can never be imitated by the other. 

The exactness of mathematics rests upon definitions, axioms 
and demonstrations. I shall content myself with showing that 
none of these, in the sense in which they are understood by the 
mathematician, can be achieved or imitated by the philosopher. 
I shall show that in philosophy the geometrician can by his 
method build only so many houses of cards, just as in mathe- 
matics the employment of a philosophical method results only 
in mere talk. Indeed it is precisely in knowing its limits that 
philosophy consists; and even the mathematician, unless his 
talent is of such a specialised character that it naturally confines 
itself to its proper field, cannot afford to ignore the warnings 
of philosophy, or to behave as if he were superior to them. 

i [Messkunst.} 



586 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

i. Definitions. To define ', as the word itself indicates, 
really only means to present the complete, original concept of 
a thing within the limits of its concept.* If this be our standard, 
an empirical concept cannot be defined at all, but only made 
explicit. For since we find in it only a few characteristics of a 
certain species of sensible object, it is never certain that we 
are not using the word, in denoting one and the same object, 
sometimes so as to stand for more, and sometimes so as to 
B ?? 6 j stand for fewer characteristics. Thus in the concept of gold 
one man may think, in addition to its weight, colour, malle- 
ability, also its property of resisting rust, while another will 
perhaps know nothing of this quality. We make use of certain 
characteristics only so long as they are adequate for the pur- 
pose of making distinctions; new observations remove some 
properties and add others; and thus the limits of the concept 
are never assured. And indeed what useful purpose could be 
served by defining an empirical concept, such, for instance, as 
that of water? When we speak of water and its properties, we 
do not stop short at what is thought in the word, water, but 
proceed to experiments. The word, with the few characteristics 
which we attach to it, is more properly to be regarded as&lt; 
merely a designation than as a concept of the thing; the so- 
called definition is nothing more than a determining of the 
word. In the second place, it is also true that no concept given 
a priori^ such as substance, cause, right, equity, etc., can, 
strictly speaking, be defined. For I can never be certain that 
the clear representation of a given concept, which as given may 
still be confused, has been completely effected, unless I know that 
it is adequate to its object. But since the concept of it may, as 
given, include many obscure representations, which we over- 
look in our analysis, although we are constantly making use of 
them in our application of the concept, the completeness of the 
analysis of my concept is always in doubt, and a multiplicity 

Completeness means clearness and sufficiency of character- 
istics; by limits is meant the precision shown in there not being more 
of these characteristics than belong to the complete concept; by 
original is meant that this determination of these limits is not 
derived from anything else, and therefore does not require any proof; 
for if it did, that would disqualify the supposed explanation from 
standing at the head flf all the judgments regarding its obfject. 



THE DISCIPLINE OF PURE REASON 587 

of suitable examples suffices only to make the completeness |g ^29 
probable, never to make it apodeictically certain. Instead of the 
term, definition, I prefer to use the term, exposition, as being a 
more guarded term, which the critic can accept as being up to 
a certain point valid, though still entertaining doubts as to the 
completeness of the analysis. Since, then, neither empirical con- 
cepts nor concepts given a priori allow of definition, the only 
remaining kind of concepts, upon which this mental operation 1 
can be tried, are arbitrarily invented concepts. A concept which 
I have invented I can always define; for since it is not given to 
me either by the nature of understanding or by experience, but 
is such as I have myself deliberately made it to be, I must know 
what I have intended to think in using it. I cannot, however, 
say that I have thereby defined a true object. 2 For if the concept 
depends on empirical conditions, as e.g. the concept of a ship's 
clock, this arbitrary concept of mine does not assure me of the 
existence or of the possibility of its object. I do not even know 
from it whether it has an object at all, and my explanation 
may better be described as a declaration of my project than 
as a definition of an object. There remain, therefore, no 
Concepts which allow of definition, except only those which 
contain an arbitrary synthesis that admits of a priori construc- 
tion. Consequently, mathematics is the only science that has 
definitions. For the object which it thinks it exhibits a priori in 
intuition, and this object certainly cannot contain either more 
or less than the concept, since it is through the definition 3 that | B J|g 
the concept of the object is given and given originally, that 
is, without its being necessary to derive the definition 3 from 
any other source. The German language has for the [Latin] 
terms exposition, explication, declaration, and definition only 
one word, Erklarung* and we need not, therefore, be so 
stringent in our requirements as altogether to refuse to philo- 
sophical explanations 6 the honourable title, definition. We 
shall confine ourselves simply to remarking that while philo- 
sophical definitions are never more than expositions of given 
concepts, mathematical definitions are constructions of con- 

1 \dieses Kunststtick.} * [einen wahren Gegenstand^\ 

8 [Erkldrung.] 

4 [This term Kant usually employs in the sense of explanation; but, as above 
indicated, it is .used in the preceding sentence in the sense of definition.! 
* [ErkLirungen.] 



588 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

cepts, originally framed by the mind itself; and that while the 
former can be obtained only by analysis (the completeness of 
which is never apodeictically certain), the latter are produced 
synthetically. Whereas, therefore, mathematical definitions 
make their concepts, in philosophical definitions concepts are 
only explained. From this it follows: 

(a) That in philosophy we must not imitate mathematics 
by beginning with definitions, unless it be by way simply of 
experiment. For since the definitions are analyses of given 
concepts, they presuppose the prior presence of the concepts, 
although in a confused state; and the incomplete exposition 
must precede the complete. Consequently, we can infer a good 
deal from a few characteristics, derived from an incomplete 
analysis, without having yet reached the complete exposition, 

B 7^] that i, the definition. In short, the definition in all its precision 
and clarity ought, in philosophy, to come rather at the end 
than at the beginning of our enquiries." In mathematics, on 
the other hand, we have no concept whatsoever prior to the 
definition, through which the concept itself is first given. For 
this reason mathematical science must always begin, and it can 
always begin, with the definition. 

(b) That mathematical definitions can never be in error. 
For since the concept is first given through the definition, it 
includes nothing except precisely what the definition intends 
should be understood by it. But although nothing incorrect can 
be introduced into its content, there may sometimes, though 
rarely, be a defect in the form in which it is clothed, namely as 
regards precision. Thus the common explanation of the circle 
that it is a curved line every point in which is equidistant 

a Philosophy is full of faulty definitions, especially of definitions 
which, while indeed containing some of the elements required, are 
yet not complete. If we could make no use of a concept till we 
had defined it, all philosophy would be in a pitiable plight. But 
since a good and safe use can still be made of the elements obtained 
by analysis so far as they go, defective definitions, that is, propositions 
which are properly not definitions, but are yet true, and are therefore 
approximations to definitions, can be employed with great advantage. 
In mathematics definition belongs ad esse, in philosophy ad melius 
esse. It is desirable to attain an adequate definition, but often very 
difficult. The jurists are still without a definition of their concept of 
right. 



THE DISCIPLINE OF PURE REASON 589 

from one and the same point (the centre), has the defect that | B 
the determination, curved, is introduced unnecessarily. For 
there must be a particular theorem, deduced from the de- 
finition and easily capable of proof, namely, that if all points 
in a line are equidistant from one and the same point, the line 
is curved (no part of it straight). Analytic definitions, on the 
other hand, may err in many ways, either through introducing 
characteristics which do not really belong to the concept, or by 
lacking that completeness which is the essential feature of a 
definition. The latter defect is due to the fact that we can never 
be quite certain of the completeness of the analysis. For these 
reasons the mathematical method of definition does not admit 
of imitation in philosophy. 

2. Axioms. These, in so far as they are immediately 
certain, are synthetic a priori principles. Now one concept 
Cannot be combined with another synthetically and also at the 
same time immediately, since, to be able to pass beyond either 
concept, a third something is required to mediate our know- 
ledge. Accordingly, since philosophy is simply what reason 
knows by means of concepts, no principle deserving the name 
of an axiom is to be found in it. Mathematics, on the other 
hand, can have axioms, since by means of the construction of 
concepts in the intuition of the object it can combine the pre- 
dicates of the object both a priori and immediately, as, for 
instance, in the proposition that three points always lie in a | B Z| 
plane. But a synthetic principle derived from concepts alone 
can never be immediately certain, for instance, the proposition 
that everything which happens has a cause. Here I must look 
round for a third something, namely, the condition of time- 
determination in an experience; I cannot obtain knowledge of 
such a principle directly and immediately from the concepts 
alone. Discursive principles are therefore quite different from 
intuitive principles, that is, from axioms; and always require 
a deduction. Axioms, on the other hand, require no such de- 
duction, and for the same reason are evident a claim which 
the philosophical principles can never advance, however great 
their certainty. Consequently, the synthetic propositions of pure, 
transcendental reason are, one and all, infinitely removed from 
being as evident which is yet so often arrogantly claimed 
on their behalf as the proposition that ttttice two make four. 



590 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

In the Analytic I have indeed introduced some axioms of in- 
tuition into the table of the principles of pure understanding; 
but the principle 1 there applied is not itself an axiom, but 
serves only to specify the principle 2 of the possibility of axioms 
in general, and is itself no more than a principle 1 derived from 
concepts. For the possibility of mathematics must itself be 
demonstrated in transcendental philosophy. Philosophy has 
therefore no axioms, and may never prescribe its a priori 

B 7*62} principles in any such absolute manner, but must resign itself 
to establishing its authority in their regard by a thorough 
deduction. 

3. Demonstrations. An apodeictic proof can be called a 
demonstration, only in so far as it is intuitive. Experience 
teaches us what is, but does not teach us that it could not 
be other than what it is. Consequently, no empirical grounds 
of proof can ever amount to apodeictic proof. Even from a 
priori concepts, as employed in discursive knowledge, there 
can never arise intuitive certainty, that is, [demonstrative] 
evidence, however apodeictically certain the judgment may 
otherwise be. Mathematics alone, therefore, contains demon- 
strations, since it derives its knowledge not from concepts 
but from the construction of them, that is, from intuition, 
which can be given a priori in accordance with the concepts. 
Even the method of algebra with its equations, from which 
the correct answer, together with its proof, is deduced by re- 
duction, is not indeed geometrical in nature, but is still con- 
structive in a way characteristic of the science. 3 The concepts 
attached to the symbols, especially concerning the relations 
of magnitudes, are presented in intuition; and this method, 
in addition to its heuristic advantages, secures all inferences 
against error by setting each one before our eyes. While 
philosophical knowledge must do without this advantage, 
inasmuch as it has always to consider the universal in 
abstracto (by means of concepts), mathematics can consider 

B 763} the universal in concrete (in the single intuition) and yet at the 
same time through pure a priori representation, whereby all 
errors are at once made evident. I should therefore prefer to 

1 [Grundsatz.] * [Prinzipium.] 

* \charakteristische K (instruction . The meaning in which Kant uses this phrase 
is doubtful. It might also be translated 'construction by means of symbols'.] 



THE DISCIPLINE OF PURE REASON 591 

call the first kind acroamatic (discursive) proof s^ since they 
may be conducted by the agency of words alone (the object 
in thought), rather than demonstrations which, as the term 
itself indicates, proceed in and through the intuition of the 
object. 

From all this it follows that it is not in keeping with the 
nature of philosophy, especially in the field of pure reason, to 
take pride in a dogmatic procedure, and to deck itself out with 
the title and insignia of mathematics, to whose ranks it does 
not belong, though it has every ground to hope for a sisterly 
union with it. Such pretensions are idle claims which can never 
be satisfied, and indeed must divert philosophy from its true 
purpose, namely, to expose the illusions of a reason that forgets 
its limits, and by sufficiently clarifying our concepts to recall 
it from its presumptuous speculative pursuits to modest but 
thorough self-knowledge. Reason must not, therefore, in its 
transcendental endeavours, hasten forward with sanguine 
expectations, as though the path which it has traversed led 
directly to the goal, and as though the accepted premisses 
could be so securely relied upon that there can be no need of 
constantly returning to them and of considering whether we 
may not perhaps, in the course of the inferences, discover de- 
fects which have been overlooked in the principles, and which 
render it necessary either to determine these principles more | B Z| 4 
fully or to change them entirely. 

I divide all apodeictic propositions, whether demonstrable 
or immediately certain, into dogmata and mathemata. A syn- 
thetic proposition directly derived from concepts is a dogma\ 
a synthetic proposition, when directly obtained through the 
construction of concepts, is a mathema. Analytic judgments 
really teach us nothing more about the object than what the 
concept which we have of it already contains; they do not 
extend our knowledge beyond the concept of the object, but 
only clarify the concept. They cannot therefore rightly be 
called dogmas (a word which might perhaps be translated 
doctrines)}- Of the two kinds of synthetic a priori propositions 
only those belonging to philosophical knowledge can, accord- 
ing to the ordinary usage of words, be entitled dogmas; the 
propositions of arithmetic or geometry would hardly be so 

1 [Lehrsprikhe.] 



592 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

named. The customary use of words thus confirms our in- 
terpretation of the term, namely, that only judgments derived 
from concepts can be called dogmatic, not those based on the 
construction of concepts. 

Now in the whole domain of pure reason, in its merely 
speculative employment, there is not to be found a single 
synthetic judgment directly derived from concepts. For, as we 
have shown, ideas cannot form the basis of any objectively 
valid synthetic judgment. Through concepts of understanding 
P ure reason does, indeed, establish secure principles, not how- 
ever directly from concepts alone, but always only indirectly 
through relation of these concepts to something altogether con- 
tingent, namely, possible experience. When such experience 
(that is, something as object of possible experiences) is pre- 
supposed, these principles are indeed apodeictically certain; 
but in themselves, directly, they can never be known a priori. 
Thus no one can acquire insight into the proposition that 
everything which happens has its cause, merely from the con- 
cepts involved. It is not, therefore, a dogma, although from 
another point of view, namely, from that of the sole field of 
its possible employment, that is, experience, it can be proved 
with complete apodeictic certainty. But though it needs proof, 
it should be entitled a principle, not a theorem, because it has 
the peculiar character that it makes possible the very experi- 
ence which is its own ground of proof, and that in this ex- 
perience it must always itself be presupposed. 

Now if in the speculative employment of pure reason there 
are no dogmas, to serve as its special subject-matter, 1 all 
dogmatic methods, whether borrowed from the mathematician 
or specially invented, are as such inappropriate. For they only 
serve to conceal defects and errors, and to mislead philosophy, 
whose true purpose is to present every step of reason in the 
clearest light. Nevertheless its method can always be system- 
B 766J atic - F r our reason i s itself, subjectively, a system, though in 
its pure employment, by means of mere concepts, it is no more 
than a system whereby our investigations can be conducted 
in accordance with principles of unity, the material being pro- 
vided by experience alone. We cannot here discuss the method 
peculiar to transcendental philosophy; we are at present con- 

1 \auch dem Inhalte nach.} 



THE DISCIPLINE OF PURE REASON 593 

cerned only with a critical estimate of what may be expected 
from our faculties whether we are in a position to build at all; 
and to what height, with the material at our disposal (the pure 
a priori concepts), we may hope to carry the edifice. 



CHAPTER I 

Section 2 

THE DISCIPLINE OF PURE REASON IN RESPECT OF ITS 
POLEMICAL EMPLOYMENT 

Reason must in all its undertakings subject itself to criti- 
cism; should it limit freedom of criticism by any prohibi- 
tions, it must harm itself, drawing upon itself a damaging 
suspicion. Nothing is so important through its usefulness, 
ilothing so sacred, that it may be exempted from this search- 
ing^ examination, which knows no respect for persons. Reason 
depends on this freedom for its very existence. For reason 
has no dictatorial authority; its verdict is always simply the 
? greement of free citizens, of whom each one must be permitted | B 
to express, without let or hindrance, his objections or even his 
veto. 

But while reason can never refuse to submit to criticism, 
it does not always have cause to fear it. In its dogmatic (non- 
mathematical) employment it is not, indeed, so thoroughly 
conscious of such exact observation of its own supreme laws, 
as not to feel constrained to present itself with diffidence, nay, 
with entire renunciation of all assumed dogmatic authority, 
to the critical scrutiny of a higher judicial reason. 

The situation is, however, quite otherwise, when reason 
has to deal not with the verdict of a judge, but with the claims 
of a fellow-citizen, and against these has only to act in self- 
defence. For since these are intended to be just as dogmatic 
in denial as its own are in affirmation, it is able to justify itself 
tear dvOpcoTTov, in a manner which ensures it against all inter- 
ference, and provides it with a title to secure possession that 
need fear no outside claims, although Kar akrfOeiav the title 
cannot itself be conclusively proved. 

By the polemical employment of pure t reason I mean the 

2Q 



594 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

defence of its propositions as against the dogmatic counter- 
propositions through which they are denied. Here the conten- 
tion is not that its own assertions may not, perhaps, be false, 

B 768 } k ut on ty *kat no one can assert tne opposite with apodeictic 
certainty, or even, indeed, with a greater degree of likelihood. 
We do not here hold our possessions upon sufferance; for 
although our title to them may not be satisfactory, it is yet 
quite certain that no one can ever be in a position to prove the 
illegality of the title. 

It is grievous, indeed, and disheartening, that there should 
be any such thing as an antithetic of pure reason, and that 
reason, which is the highest tribunal for all conflicts, should 
thus be at variance with itself. We had to deal, in a previous 
chapter, with such an antithetic; but it turned out to be only 
an apparent conflict, resting upon a misunderstanding. In ac- 
cordance with the common prejudice, it took appearances as 
being things in themselves, and then required an absolute 
completeness of their synthesis in the one mode or in the l other 
(this being equally impossible in either way) a demand which 
is not at all permissible in respect of appearances. There was, 
therefore, no real self-contradiction of reason in the propound- 
ing of the two propositions, that the series of appearances given 
in themselves has an absolutely first beginning, and that this 
series is absolutely and in itself without any beginning. For 
the two propositions are quite consistent with each other, inas- 
much as appearances -, in respect of their existence (as appear- 
ances), are in themselves nothing at all, that is, [so regarded] 
are something self-contradictory; for the assumption [that 
they do thus exist in themselves] must naturally lead to self- 
contradictory inferences. 

B 760} ^ ut t ^ iere are otner cases in which we cannot allege any 
such misunderstanding, and in which we cannot, therefore, 
dispose of the conflict of reason in the above manner when, 
for instance, it is asserted, on the one hand, theistically, that 
there is a supreme being, and on the other hand, atheistically, 
that there is no supreme being; or as in psychology, that every- 
thing which thinks is endowed with absolute and abiding unity 
and is therefore distinct from all transitory material unity, 
and, in opposition thereto, that the soul is not immaterial unity 

1 [Reading, with Vorlander, die andere for andere.], 



THE DISCIPLINE OF PURE REASON 595 

and cannot be exempt from transitoriness. For since in these 
cases the understanding has to deal only with things in them- 
selves and not with appearances, the object of such questions 
is free from any foreign element that is in contradiction with 
its nature. There would indeed be a real conflict, if pure reason 
had anything to say on the negative side which amounted to 
a positive ground for its negative contentions. For so far as 
concerns criticism of the grounds of proof offered by those 
who make dogmatic affirmations, the criticism 1 can be freely 
admitted, without our having on that account to give up these 
affirmations, which have at least the interest of reason in 
their favour an interest to which the opposite party cannot 
appeal. 

I do not at all share the opinion which certain excel- 
lent and thoughtful men (such as Sulzer 2 ), in face of the 
weakness of the arguments hitherto employed, have so often 
been led to express, that we may hope sometime to discover 
conclusive demonstrations of the two cardinal propositions of 
our reason that there is a God, and that there is a future life. 
On the contrary, I am certain that this will never happen. For | B 
whence will reason obtain ground for such synthetic assertions, 
which do not relate to objects of experience and their inner 
possibility. But it is also apodeictically certain that there will 
never be anyone who will be able to assert the opposite with 
the least show [of proof], much less, dogmatically. For since he 
could prove this only through pure reason, he must undertake 
to prove that a supreme being, and the thinking subject in 
us [viewed] as pure intelligence, are impossible. But whence 
will he obtain the modes of knowledge which could justify 
him in thus judging synthetically in regard to things that lie 
beyond all possible experience. We may therefore be so 3 com- 
pletely assured that no one will ever prove the opposite, that 
there is no need for us to concern ourselves with formal argu- 
ments. We are always in a position to accept these propositions 
propositions which are so very closely bound up with the 
speculative interest of our reason in its empirical employment, 
and which, moreover, are the sole means of reconciling the 

1 [Reading, with Wille, ihr for ihm.] 
. a [J.G. Sulzer (1720-1 779).] 
8 [Reading, with Erdmann, so ganz f #r ganz.] 



596 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

speculative with the practical interest. As against our opponent, 
who must not be considered here as a critic only, we are equipped 
with our non liquet&gt; which cannot fail to disconcert him. At 
the same time we do not mind his turning this argument 

B 77^} u P on ourselves, since we always have in reserve the subjective 
maxim of reason, which is necessarily lacking to our opponent, 
and under its protection can look upon all his vain attacks with 
a tranquil indifference. 

There is thus no real antithetic of pure reason. For the 
arena for such an antithetic would have to be located in the 
domain of pure theology and psychology; and in that domain 
no combatant can be adequately equipped, or have weapons 
that we need fear. Ridicule and 1 boasting form his whole 
armoury, and these can be laughed at, as mere child's play. 
This is a comforting consideration, and affords reason fresh 
courage; for upon what could it rely, if, while it alone is called 
upon to remove all errors, it should yet be at variance with 
itself, and without hope of peace and quiet possession. 

Everything which nature has itself instituted is good for 
some purpose. Even poisons have their use. They serve to 
counteract other poisons generated in our bodily humours, 
and must have a place in every complete pharmacopoeia. The 
objections against the persuasions and complacency of our 
purely speculative reason arise from the very nature of reason 
itself, and must therefore have their own good use and purpose, 
which ought not to be disdained. Why has Providence placed 
many things which are closely bound up with our highest in- 

g Zl^} terests so far beyond our reach that we are only permitted to 
apprehend them in a manner lacking in clearness and subject 
to doubt in such fashion that our enquiring gaze is more ex- 
cited than satisfied? We may, indeed, be in doubt whether it 
serves any useful purpose, and whether it is not perhaps even 
harmful, to venture upon bold utterances in regard to such 
uncertain matters. But there can be no manner of doubt that 
it is always best to grant reason complete liberty, both of 
enquiry and of criticism, so that it may not be hindered in 
attending to its own proper interests. These interests are no 
less furthered by the limitation than by the extension of its 
speculations, and will always suffer when outside influences 

1 [R&amp;iding, with 5th edition, und for oder,} 



THE DISCIPLINE OF PURE REASON 597 

intervene to divert it from its proper path, and to constrain 
it by what is irrelevant to its own proper ends. 

Allow, therefore, your opponent to speak in the name of 
reason, and combat him only with weapons of reason. For the 
rest, have no anxiety as to the outcome in its bearing upon 
our practical interests, since in a merely speculative dispute 
they are never in any way affected. The conflict serves only to 
disclose a certain antinomy of reason which, inasmuch as it 
is due to the very nature of reason, must receive a hearing 
and be scrutinised. Reason is benefited by the consideration 
of its object from both sides, and its judgment is corrected in 
being thus limited. What is here in dispute is not the practical 
interests of reason but the mode of their presentation. 1 For 
although we have to surrender the language of knowledge, {3773 
we still have sufficient ground to employ, in the presence of 
the most exacting reason, the quite legitimate language of a 
firm faith. 

If we should ask the dispassionate David Hume, [by 
temperament] so peculiarly fitted for balanced judgment, 
what led him to undermine, through far-fetched subtleties 
o elaborately thought out,* the conviction which is so com- 
forting and beneficial for mankind, that their reason has 
sufficient insight for the assertion and for the determinate 
conception of a supreme being, he would answer: * Solely in 
order to advance reason in its self-knowledge, and because of 
a certain indignation at the violence that is done to reason by 
those who, while boasting of its powers, yet hinder it from 
candid admission of the weaknesses which have become ob- 
vious to it through its own self-examination 1 . If, on the other 
hand, we should ask Priestley, 8 who was wholly devoted to the 
empirical employment of reason and out of sympathy with 
all transcendent speculation, what motives had induced him 
himself a pious and zealous teacher of religion to pull down 
two such pillars of all religion as the freedom and immortality 
of the soul (the hope of a future life is for him only the expecta- 
tion of the miracle of resurrection), he would not be able to give 

1 \nicht die Sache, sondern der Ton.] 

2 [The reference is to Hume's Dialogues concerning Natural Religion (i 779).] 

3 [Joseph Priestley (1733-1804): Disquisitions relating to Matter and Spirit 
(1777); The* Doctrine of Philosophical Necessity (1777)?] 



598 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

any other answer than that he was concerned for the interest 
of reason, which must suffer when we seek to exempt certain 
objects from the laws of material nature, the only laws which 

B 774} we can know and determine with exactitude. It would be 
unjust to decry the latter (who knew how to combine his para- 
doxical teaching with the interests of religion), and so to give 
pain to a well-intentioned man, simply because he is unable 
to find his bearings, having strayed outside the field of natural 
science. And the same favour must be accorded to the no 
less well disposed and in his moral character quite blameless 
Hume, when he insists upon the relevance, in this field, of 
his subtly thought-out speculations. For, as he rightly held, 
their object lies entirely outside the limits of natural science, 
in the domain of pure ideas. 

What, then, is to be done, especially in view of the danger 
which would thus seem to threaten the best interests of man- 
kind? 1 Nothing is more natural, nothing is more reasonable, 
than the decision which we are hereby called upon to make. 
Leave such thinkers free to take their own line. If they exhibit 
talent, if they initiate new and profound enquiries, in a word, 
if they show reason, reason always stands to gain. If we resort to 1 
other means than those of untrammelled reason, if we raise the 
cry of high treason, and act as if we were summoning the vulgar 
to extinguish a conflagration the vulgar who have no under- 
standing of such subtle enquiries we make ourselves ridicu- 
lous. For the question at issue is not as to what, in these enquiries, 
is beneficial or detrimental to the best interests of mankind, 
but only how far reason can advance by means of speculation 

B 77?} ^ at a bstracts from all interests, and whether such speculation 
can count for anything, or must not rather be given up in ex- 
change for the practical. Instead, therefore, of rushing into the 
fight, sword in hand, we should rather play the part of the 
peaceable onlooker, from the safe seat of the critic. The struggle 
is indeed toilsome to the combatants, but for us can be enter- 
taining; and its outcome certain to be quite bloodless must 
be of advantage as contributing to our theoretical insight. For 
it is indeed absurd to look to reason for enlightenment, and 
yet to prescribe beforehand which side she must necessarily 
favour. Besides, reason is already of itself so confined and held 

* * [dent gcmeinen JBesten.] 



THE DISCIPLINE OF PURE REASON 599 

within limits by reason, that we have no need to call out the 
guard, with a view to bringing the civil power to bear upon 
that party whose alarming superiority may seem to us to be 
dangerous. In this dialectic no victory is gained that need give 
us cause for anxiety. 

Reason does indeed stand in sore need of such dialectical 
debate; and it is greatly to be wished that the debate had been 
instituted sooner and with unqualified public approval. For in 
that case criticism would sooner have reached a ripe maturity, 
and all these disputes would of necessity at once have come to 
an end, the opposing parties having learned to recognise the 
illusions and prejudices which have set them at variance. 

There is in human nature a certain disingenuousness, 
which, like everything that comes from nature, must finally f 
contribute to good ends, namely, a disposition to conceal our 
re^l sentiments, and to make show of certain assumed senti- 
ments which are regarded as good and creditable. This 
tendency to conceal ourselves and to assume the appearance 
of what contributes to our advantage, has, undoubtedly, not 
only civilised us, but gradually, in a certain measure, moral- 
ised us. For so long as we were not in a position to see 
through the outward show of respectability, honesty, and 
modesty, we found in the seemingly genuine examples of 
goodness with which we were surrounded a school for self- 
improvement. But this disposition to represent ourselves as 
better than we are, and to give expression to sentiments which 
we do not share, serves as a merely provisional arrangement, 
to lead us from the state of savage rudeness, and to allow of 
our assuming at least the outward bearing* of what we know to 
be good. But later, when true principles have been developed, 
and have become part of our way of thought, this duplicity 
must be more and more earnestly combated; otherwise it cor- 
rupts the heart, and checks the growth of good sentiments 
with the rank weeds of fair appearances. 

I am sorry to observe the same disingenuousness, mis- 
representation, and hypocrisy even in the utterances of specu- 
lative thought, where there are far fewer hindrances to our 
making, as is fitting, frank and unreserved admission of our 
thoughts, and.no advantage whatsoever in acting otherwise, (g 749 

1 \die Manier.] 



6oo KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

For what can be more prejudicial to the interests of knowledge 
than to communicate even our very thoughts in a falsified 
form, to conceal doubts which we feel in regard to our 
own assertions, or to give an appearance of conclusiveness 
to grounds of proofs which we ourselves recognise to be in- 
sufficient. So long as mere personal vanity is what breeds 
these secret devices and this is generally the case with those 
speculative judgments which concern no special interest and 
do not easily allow of apodeictic certainty it is counteracted, 
in the process of enlisting general acceptance ', by the vanity of 
others; and thus in the end the result is the same as would have 
been obtained, though much sooner, by entirely sincere and 
honest procedure. When the common people are of opinion 
that those who indulge in subtle questionings aim at nothing 
less than to shake the very foundations of public welfare, it 
may, indeed, seem not only prudent but permissible, and in- 
deed even commendable, to further the good cause through so- 
phistical arguments rather than allow its supposed antagonists 
the advantage of having made us lower our tone to that of a 
merely practical conviction, and of having compelled us to 
admit our lack of speculative and apodeictic certainty. 'I 
cannot, however, but think that nothing is so entirely incom- 
patible with the purpose of maintaining a good cause as deceit, 
3 ^g| hypocrisy, and fraud. Surely the least that can be demanded 
is that in a matter of pure speculation, when weighing the con- 
siderations cited by reason, we should proceed in an entirely 
sincere manner. If we could confidently count even upon this 
little, the conflict of speculative reason regarding the im- 
portant questions of God, the immortality of the soul, and 
freedom, would long ago have been decided, or would very 
soon be brought to a conclusion. Thus it often happens that 
purity of purpose is in inverse ratio to the goodness of the 
cause, and that candour and honesty are perhaps more likely 
to be found among its assailants than among its defenders. 

I shall therefore assume that I have readers who do not 
wish to see a righteous cause defended in an unrighteous 
manner; and that they will consequently take it as agreed, 
that, according to our principles of criticism, and having regard 
not to what commonly happens, but to what oug{it to happen, 
there can, properfy speaking, be no polemic of pifre reason. 



THE DISCIPLINE OF PURE REASON 601 

For how can two persons carry on a dispute about a thing the 
reality of which neither of them can present in actual or even in 
possible experience a dispute in which they brood over the 
mere idea of the thing, in order to extract from it something 
more than the idea, namely, the reality of the object itself? What 
means have they of ending the dispute, since neither of them 
can make his thesis genuinely comprehensible and certain, but 
only attack and refute that of his opponent? For this is the fate 
of all assertions of pure reason: that since they transcend the {1/779 
conditions of all possible experience, outside which the authen- 
tication of truth is in no wise possible, while at the same time 
they have to make use of the laws of the understanding laws 
which are adapted only for empirical employment, but without 
which no step can be taken in synthetic thought neither side 
can avoid exposing its weakness, and each can therefore take 
advantage of the weakness of the other. 

The critique of pure reason can be regarded as the true 
tribunal for all disputes of pure reason; for it is not involved 
in these disputes disputes which are immediately concerned 
with objects but is directed to the determining and esti- 
mating of the rights of reason in general, in accordance with 
the principles of their first institution. 

In the absence of this critique reason is, as it were, in the 
state of nature, and can establish and secure its assertions and 
claims only through war. The critique, on the other hand, 
arriving at all its decisions in the light of fundamental prin- 
ciples of its own institution, the authority of which no one can 
question, secures to us the peace of a legal order, in which our 
disputes have to be conducted solely by the recognised methods 
of legal action. In the former state, the disputes are ended by 
a victory to which both sides lay claim, and which is generally 
followed by a merely temporary armistice, arranged by some 
mediating authority; in the latter, by a judicial sentence 
which, as it strikes at the very root of the conflicts, effectively 
secures an eternal peace. The endless disputes of a merely 
dogmatic reason thus finally constrain us to seek relief in 
some critique of reason itself, and in a legislation based upon 
such criticism. As Hobbes maintains, the state of nature is a 
state of injustice and violence, and we have no option save to 
abandon it and submit ourselves to the coAstraint of law, which 



602 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

limits our freedom solely in order that it may be consistent 
with the freedom of others and with the common good of all. 
This freedom will carry with it the right to submit openly 
for discussion the thoughts and doubts with which we find our- 
selves unable to deal, and to do so without being decried as 
troublesome and dangerous citizens. This is one of the original 
rights of human reason, which recognises no other judge than 
that universal human reason in which everyone has his say. And 
since all improvement of which our state is capable must be ob- 
tained from this source, such a right is sacred and must not be 
curtailed. Indeed we are very ill-advised in decrying as danger- 
ous any bold assertions against, or audacious attacks upon, 
the view which already has on its side the approval of the 
largest and best portion of the community; in so doing we 
B 7 8i) are ascr ibing to them an importance which they are not 
entitled to claim. Whenever I hear that a writer of real ability 
has demonstrated away the freedom of the human will, the 
hope of a future life, and the existence of God, I am eager to 
read the book, for I expect him by his talents to increase my 
insight into these matters. Already, before having opened it, I 
am perfectly certain that he has not justified any one of his 
specific claims; not because I believe that I am in possession 
of conclusive proofs of these important propositions, but 
because the transcendental critique, which has disclosed to 
me all the resources of our pure reason, has completely con- 
vinced me that, as reason is incompetent to arrive at'affirmative 
assertions in this field, it is equally unable, indeed even less 
able, to establish any negative conclusion in regard to these 
questions. For from what source will the freethinker derive his 
professed knowledge 1 that there is, for example, no supreme 
being? This proposition is outside the field of possible experi- 
ence, and therefore beyond the limits of all human insight. 
The reply of the dogmatic defender of the good cause I should 
not read at all. I know beforehand that he will attack the 
sophistical arguments of his opponent simply in order to gain 
acceptance for his own; and I also know that a quite familiar 
line of false argument does not yield so much material for new 
observations as one that is novel and ingeniously elaborated. 

1 [Reading, with Wille, der Freigeist seine angebliche KenntKis for der 
angebliche Freigeist seine Klnntnis,] * 



THE DISCIPLINE OF PURE REASON 603 

The opponent of religion is indeed, in his own way, no less 
dogmatic, but he affords me a welcome opportunity of apply- |g J| 
ing and, in this or that respect, amending the principles of my 
Critique, while at the same time I need be in no fear of these 
principles being in the least degree endangered. 

But must not the young, at least, when entrusted to our 
academical teaching, be warned against such writings, and 
preserved from a premature knowedge of such dangerous 
propositions, until their faculty of judgment is mature, or 
rather until the doctrine which we seek to instil into them has 
taken such firm root, that they are able effectively to with- 
stand all persuasion to contrary views, from whatever quarter 
it may come? 

If we are to insist on holding to dogmatic procedure in 
matters of pure reason, and on disposing of our opponents 
in strictly polemical fashion, that is, by ourselves taking sides 
in the controversy, and therefore equipping ourselves with 
proofs in support of the opposite assertions, certainly this 
procedure would for the time being be the most expedient; but 
in the long run nothing would be more foolish and ineffective 
than to keep youthful reason thus for a period under tutelage. 
This will indeed guard the young temporarily against per- 
version. But when, later, either curiosity or the fashion of the 
age brings such writings under their notice, will their youthful 
conviction then stand the test? Whoever, in withstanding the 
attacks of his opponent, has at his disposal only dogmatic 
weapons, and is unable to develop the dialectic which lies 
concealed in his own breast no less than in that of his an- |g ?| 
tagonist, [is in a dangerous position]. He sees sophistical 
arguments, which have the attraction of novelty, set in oppo- 
sition to sophistical arguments which no longer have that 
attraction, but, on the contrary, tend to arouse the suspicion 
that advantage has been taken of his youthful credulity. And 
accordingly he comes to believe that there can be no better 
way of showing that he has outgrown childish discipline than 
by casting aside these well-meant warnings; and accustomed 
as he is to dogmatism, he drinks deep draughts of the poison, 
which destroys his principles by a counter-dogmatism. 

In academic teaching we ought to pursue the course 
exactly opposite to that which is here recommended, pro- 



604 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

vided always that the teaching is based on thorough instruc- 
tion in the criticism of pure reason. For in order to bring the 
principles of this criticism into operation as soon as possible, 
and to show their sufficiency even when dialectical illusion is 
at its height, it is absolutely necessary that the attacks which 
seem so terrible to the dogmatist should be made to exercise 
their full force upon the pupil's reason, which though still 
weak has been enlightened through criticism, and that the pupil 
should thus be allowed the opportunity of testing for himself, 
one by one, by reference to the critical principles, how ground- 
less are the assertions of those who have launched these attacks. 
As it is by no means difficult for him to resolve these arguments 
into thin air, he early begins to feel his own capacity to secure 
himself against such injurious deceptions, which must finally 

B ri 6 } ^ ose ^ or ki m a ^ their illusory power. Those same blows which 
destroy the structures of the enemy must indeed be equally 
destructive to any speculative structure which he may per- 
chance himself wish to erect. This does not, however, in the 
least disturb him, since he has no need of any such shelter, 
being still in possession of good expectations in the practical 
sphere, where he may confidently hope to find firmer ground 
upon which to erect his own rational and beneficial system. 

There is, therefore, properly speaking, no polemic in the 
field of pure reason. Both parties beat the air, and wrestle with 
their own shadows, since they go beyond the limits of nature, 
where there is nothing that they can seize and hold with their 
dogmatic grasp. Fight as they may, the shadows which they 
cleave asunder grow together again forthwith, like the heroes 
in Valhalla, to disport themselves anew in the bloodless con- 
tests. 

But neither can we admit that there is any sceptical em- 
ployment of pure reason, such as might be entitled the prin- 
ciple of neutrality in all its disputes. To set reason at variance 
with itself, to supply it with weapons on both sides, and then 
to look on, quietly and scoffingly, at the fierce struggle, is not, 
from the dogmatic point of view, a seemly spectacle, but ap- 
pears to suggest a mischievous and malevolent disposition. 
If, however, we consider the invincible obstinacy and the 
boastfulness of those who argue dogmatically, and who refuse 

B 785} * allow their claims to be moderated by any criticism, there 



THE DISCIPLINE OF PURE REASON 605 

is really no other available course of action than to set against 
the boasting of the one side the no less justified boasting of the 
other, in the hope that the resistance thus offered to reason 
may at least serve to disconcert it, to awaken some doubts as 
to its pretensions, and to make it willing to give a hearing to 
criticism. But to allow ourselves simply to acquiesce in these 
doubts, and thereupon to set out to commend the conviction 
and admission of our ignorance not merely as a remedy against 
the complacency of the dogmatists, but likewise as the right 
method of putting an end to the conflict of reason with itself, 
is a futile procedure, and can never suffice to overcome the 
restlessness of reason. At best it is merely a means of awaken- 
ing it from its sweet dogmatic dreams, and of inducing it to 
enter upon a more careful examination of its own position. 
Since, however, the sceptical method of escaping from the 
troublesome affairs of reason appears to be, as it were, a short 
cut by which we can arrive at a permanent peace in philosophy, 
or [if it be not that], is at least the road favoured by those who 
would feign make show of having a philosophical justification 
for their contemptuous dislike of all enquiries of this kind, I 
consider it necessary to exhibit this way of thinking in its true 
light. 

The Impossibility of a Sceptical Satisfaction of Pure | B ^ 
Reason in its Internal Conflicts 

The consciousness of my ignorance (unless at the same 
time this ignorance is recognised as being necessary), instead 
of ending my enquiries, ought rather to be itself the reason 
for entering upon them. All ignorance is either ignorance of 
things or ignorance of the function and limits of knowledge. 
If ignorance is only x accidental, it must incite me, in the former 
regard to a dogmatic enquiry concerning things (objects), in 
the latter regard to a critical enquiry concerning the limits of 
my possible knowledge. But that my ignorance is absolutely 
necessary, and that I am therefore absolved from all further 
enquiry, cannot be established empirically, from observation^ 
but only through an examination, critically conducted, of the 
primary sources of our knowledge. The determination of the 
limits of our reason cannot, therefore, be made 
1 [Reading, with Erdmann, nur for,w.] 



606 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

grounds; on the other hand, that limitation of it which con- 
sists merely in an indeterminate knowledge of an ignorance 
never to be completely removed, can be recognised a posteriori 
by reference to that which, notwithstanding all we know, still 
remains to be known. The former knowledge of our ignor- 
ance, which is possible only through criticism of reason itself, 
is science', the latter is nothing but perception, and we can- 

B 7^7} no * sa y now ^ ar * ne inferences from perception may extend. 
If I represent the earth as it appears to my senses, as a flat 
surface, with a circular horizon, 1 I cannot know how far it 
extends. But experience teaches me that wherever I may go, 
I always see a space around me in which 2 I could proceed 
further; and thus I know the limits of my actual knowledge 
of the earth at any given time, but not the limits of all possible 
geography. But if I have got so far as to know that the earth 
is a sphere and that its surface is spherical, I am able even 
from a small part of it, for instance, from the magnitude of a 
degree, to know determinately, in accordance with principles 
a priori, the diameter, and through it the total superficial area 
of the earth; and although I am ignorant of the objects which 
this surface may contain, I yet have knowledge in respect of 
its circuit, magnitude, and limits. 

The sum of all the possible objects of our knowledge ap- 
pears to us to be a plane, with an apparent horizon namely, 
that which in its sweep comprehends it all, and which has been 
entitled by us the idea of unconditioned totality. To reach 
this concept empirically is impossible, and all attempts to 
determine it a priori in accordance with an assured principle 

B 788 } h ave P rov ed vain. None the less all the questions raised by our 
pure reason are as to what may be outside the horizon, 8 or, it 
may be, on its boundary line. 

The celebrated David Hume was one of those geographers 
of human reason who have imagined that they have sufficiently 
disposed of all such questions by setting them outside the hori- 
zon of human reason a horizon which yet he was not able 
to determine. Hume dwelt in particular upon the principle of 
causality, and quite rightly observed that its truth, and even 
the objective validity of the concept of efficient cause in 

1 \als einen Teller.] a [Reading, with Erdmann, darin for dahin.] 

8 [Reading, witb Erdmann, dent Horizont for diesem floristonte.} 



THE DISCIPLINE OF PURE REASON 607 

general, is based on no insight, that is, on no a priori know- 
ledge, and that its authority cannot therefore be ascribed to 
its necessity, but merely to its general utility in the course of 
experience, and to a certain subjective necessity which it 
thereby acquires, and which he entitles custom. From the 
incapacity of our reason to make use of this principle in any 
manner that transcends experience, he inferred the nullity of 
all pretensions of reason to advance, beyond the empirical. 

A procedure of this kind subjecting the facts l of reason 
to examination, and if necessary to blame may be entitled 
the censorship of reason. This censorship must certainly lead 
to doubt regarding all transcendent employment of principles. 
But this is only the second step, and does not by any means | 
complete the work of enquiry. The first step in matters of pure 
reason, marking its infancy, is dogmatic. The second step is 
sceptical, and indicates that experience has rendered our judg- 
'ment wiser and more circumspect. But a third step, such as 
can be taken only by fully matured judgment, based on as- 
sured principles of proved universality, is now necessary, 
namely, to subject to examination, not the facts of reason, but 
reason itself, in the whole extent of its powers, and as regards 
its aptitude for pure a priori modes of knowledge. This is not 
the censorship but the criticism of reason, whereby not its 
present bounds* but its determinate [and necessary] limits? 
not its ignorance on this or that point but its ignorance in 
regard to all possible questions of a certain kind, are demon- 
strated from principles, and not merely arrived at by way of 
conjecture. Scepticism is thus a resting-place for human 
reason, where it can reflect upon its dogmatic wanderings and 
make survey of the region in which it finds itself, so that for 
the future it may be able to choose its path with more certainty. 
But it is no dwelling-place for permanent settlement. Such can 
be obtained only through perfect certainty in our knowledge, 
alike of the objects themselves and of the limits within which 
all our knowledge of objects is enclosed. 

Our reason is not like a plane indefinitely far extended, 
the limits of which we know in a general way only; but must 
rather be compared to a sphere, the radius of which can be 
determined from the curvature of the arc of its surface that 

1 {die Fakta.} * [Sckrdnken.] , 8 [Grenzen.] 



608 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

is to say, from the nature of synthetic a priori propositions 
and whereby we can likewise specify with certainty its 
volume and its limits. Outside this sphere (the field of experi- 
ence) there is nothing that can be an object for reason; nay, the 
very questions in regard to such supposed objects relate only 
to subjective principles of a complete determination of those 
relations which can come under the concepts of the under- 
standing and which can be found within the empirical sphere 

We are actually in possession of a priori synthetic modes 
of knowledge, 1 as is shown by the principles of understanding 
which anticipate experience. If anyone is quite unable to 
comprehend the possibility of these principles, he may at first 
be inclined to doubt whether they actually dwell in us a 
priori\ but he cannot on this account declare that they are 
beyond the powers of the understanding, and so represent all 
the steps which reason takes under their guidance as being null 
and void. All that he can say is that if we could have insight intc 
their origin and authenticity, we should be able to determine 
the scope and limits of our reason, but that until we can haVe 
A 763) such insight any assertions as to the limits of reason are made 
at random. And on this ground a general doubt regarding all 
dogmatic philosophy, proceeding as such philosophy does with- 
out criticism of reason itself, is entirely justified; but we cannot 
therefore altogether deny to reason the right to take such for- 
ward steps, once we have prepared and secured the way for 
them by a more thorough preparation of the ground. For all 
the concepts, nay, all the questions, which pure reason presents 
to us, have their source not in experience, but exclusively in 
reason itself, and must therefore allow of solution and of being 
determined in regard to their validity or invalidity. We have no 
right to ignore these problems, as if their solution really de- 
pended on the nature of things, and as if we might therefore, 
on the plea of our incapacity, decline to occupy ourselves with 
their further investigation; for since reason is the sole begetter 
of these ideas, it is under obligation to give an account of their 
validity or of their illusory, dialectical nature. 

All sceptical polemic should properly be directed only 
against the dogmatist, who, without any misgivings as to his 
fundamental objective principles, that is, without criticism, 
1 [Reading, w f ith Erdmann, Erkenntnisse for Erkennlnis^ 



THE DISCIPLINE OF PURE REASON 609 

proceeds complacently upon his adopted path; it should be 
designed simply to put him out of countenance and thus to 
bring him to self-knowledge. In itself, however, this polemic 
is of no avail whatsoever in enabling us to decide what it is 
that we can and what it is that we cannot know. All unsuccess- 
ful dogmatic attempts of reason are facts, 1 and it is always of |g 
advantage to submit them to the censorship of the sceptic. 
But this can decide nothing regarding those expectations of 
reason which lead it to hope for better success in its future 
attempts, and to build claims on this foundation; and con- 
sequently no mere censorship can put an end to the dispute 
regarding the rights of human reason. 

Hume is perhaps the most ingenious of all the sceptics, and 
beyond all question is without rival in respect of the influence 
which the sceptical procedure can exercise in awakening 
reason to a thorough self-examination. It will therefore well 
repay us to make clear to ourselves, so far as may be relevant to 
our purpose, the course of the reasoning, and the errors, of so 
acute and estimable a man a course of reasoning which at 
the start was certainly on the track of truth. 

Hume was perhaps aware, although he never followed the 
matter out, that in judgments of a certain kind we pass beyond 
our concept of the object. I have entitled this kind of judg- 
ments synthetic. There is no difficulty as to how, by means of 
experience, I can pass beyond the concept which I previously 
have. Experience is in itself a synthesis of perceptions, 
whereby the concept which I have obtained by means of a 
perception is increased through the addition of other per- 
ceptions. But we suppose ourselves to be able to pass a priori 
beyond our concept, and so to extend our knowledge. This we |g ? 6 ^ 
attempt to do either through the pure understanding, in respect 
of that which is at least capable of being an object of experi- 
ence^ or through pure reason, in respect of such properties of 
things, or indeed even of the existence of such things, as can 
never be met with in experience. Our sceptical philosopher did 
not distinguish these two kinds of judgments, as he yet ought 
to have done, but straightway proceeded to treat this self- 
increment of concepts, and, as we may say, this spontaneous 
generation on the part of our understanding and of our reason, 

1 [Fakta.] 

2 R 



6io KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

without impregnation by experience, as being impossible. 
He therefore regarded all the supposed a priori principles 
of these faculties as fictitious, and concluded that they are 
nothing but a custom-bred habit arising from experience 
and its laws, and are consequently merely empirical, that is, 
rules that are in themselves contingent, and to which we 
ascribe a supposititious necessity and universality. In support 
of his assertion of this startling thesis, he cited the universally 
recognised principle of the relation between cause and effect. 
For since no faculty of understanding can carry us from the 
concept of a thing to the existence of something else that is 
thereby universally and necessarily given, he believed that he 
was therefore in a position to conclude that in the absence of 
experience we have nothing that can increase our concept and 
justify us in propounding a judgment which thus enlarges 
B 794} i tse lf a priori- That sunlight should melt wax and yet also 
harden clay, no understanding, he pointed out, can discover 
from the concepts which we previously possessed of these 
things, much less infer them according to a law. Only experi- 
ence is able to teach us such a law. But, as we have discovered 
in the Transcendental Logic, although we can never pasS 
immediately beyond the content of the concept which is given 
us, we are nevertheless able, in relation to a third thing, 
namely, possible experience, to know the law of its connection 
with other things, and to do so in an a priori manner. If, 
therefore, wax, which was formerly hard, melts, I can know 
a priori that something must have preceded, ([that something 
being] for instance [in this case] the heat of the sun), upon which 
the melting has followed according to a fixed law, although 
a priori, independently of experience, I could not determine, 
in any specific manner, either the cause from the effect, or the 
effect from the cause. Hume was therefore in error in inferring 
from the contingency of our determination in accordance with 
the law the contingency of the law itself. The passing be- 
yond the concept of a thing to possible experience (which 
takes place a priori and constitutes the objective reality of the 
concept) he confounded with the synthesis of the objects of 
actual experience, which is always empirical. He thus con- 
founds a principle of affinity, which has its seat in the under- 
standing and affirms necessary connection, with a rule of 



THE DISCIPLINE OF PURE REASON 611 

association, which exists only in the imitative faculty of im- | B 
agination, and which can exhibit only contingent, not objective, 
connections. 

The sceptical errors of this otherwise singularly acute 
thinker arose chiefly from a defect which he shares in common 
with all dogmatists, namely, that he did not make a system- 
atic review of all the various kinds of a priori synthesis as- 
cribable to the understanding. For he would then have found, 
to mention only one of many possible examples, that the prin- 
ciple of permanence is a principle of this character, and that, 
like the principle of causality, it anticipates experience. He 
would thus have been able to prescribe determinate limits 
to the activities whereby the understanding and pure reason 
extend themselves a priori. Instead of so doing, he merely 
restricts the understanding, without defining its limits, and 
while creating a general mistrust fails to supply any deter- 
minate knowledge of the ignorance which for us is un- 
av^oidable. For while subjecting to censorship certain prin- 
ciples of the understanding, he makes no attempt to assess 
the understanding itself, in respect of all its powers, by 
the assay-balance of criticism; while rightly denying to the 
understanding what it cannot really supply, he goes on to 
deny it all power of extending itself a priori, and this in 
spite of his never having tested it as a whole. Thus the fate 
that waits upon all scepticism likewise befalls Hume, namely, 
that his own sceptical teaching comes to be doubted, as being 
based only on facts which are contingent, not on principles |g 
which can constrain to a necessary renunciation of all right 
to dogmatic assertions. 

Further, he draws no distinction between the well- 
grounded claims of the understanding and the dialectical 
pretensions of reason, though it is indeed chiefly against 
the latter that his attacks are directed. Accordingly that 
peculiarly characteristic ardour with which reason insists 
upon giving free rein to itself, has not in the least been disturbed 
but only temporarily impeded. It does not feel that it has been 
shut out from the field in which it is wont to disport itself; 
and so, in spite of its being thwarted in this and that direc- 
tion, it cannot be made entirely to desist from these ventures. 
On the contrary , the attacks lead only to counter-preparations, 



612 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

and make us the more obstinate in insisting upon our own views. 
But a complete review of all the powers of reason and the 
conviction thereby obtained of the certainty of its claims to a 
modest territory, as also of the vanity of higher pretensions 
puts an end to the conflict, and induces it to rest satisfied with 
a limited but undisputed patrimony. 

To the uncritical dogmatist, who has not surveyed the 
sphere of his understanding, and therefore has not determined, 
in accordance with principles, the limits of his possible know- 
ledge, these sceptical attacks are not only dangerous but even 
destructive. For he does not know beforehand how far his 
powers extend, and indeed believes that their limits can be 
determined by the simple method of trial and failure. In con- 
sequence of this, if on being attacked there is a single one of 
B 797} his assertions that he is unable to justify, or which involves 
illusion for which he also cannot account in terms of any 
principles, suspicion falls on all his contentions, however 
plausible they may appear. 

The sceptic is thus the taskmaster who constrains the dog- 
matic reasoner to develop a sound critique of the understand- 
ing and reason. When we have advanced thus far, we need 
fear no further challenge, since we have learned to distinguish 
our t real possessions from that which lies entirely outside them; 
and as we make no claims in regard to this latter domain, 
we cannot become involved in any dispute in respect to it. 
While, therefore, the sceptical procedure cannot of itself yield 
any satisfying answer to the questions of reason, none the 
less it prepares the way by arousing reason to circumspection, 
and by indicating the radical measures which are adequate 
to secure it in its legitimate possessions. 



CHAPTER I 
Section 3 

THE DISCIPLINE OF PURE REASON IN REGARD TO 
HYPOTHESES 

Since criticism of our reason has at last taught us that 
we cannot by means of its pure and speculative employment 
arrive at any knowledge whatsoever, may it not seem that a 



THE DISCIPLINE OF PURE REASON 613 

proportionately wider field is opened for hypotheses'* For are 
we not at liberty, where we cannot make assertions, at least 
to invent theories and to have opinions? 1 

If the imagination is not simply to be visionary? but is to 
be inventive* under the strict surveillance of reason, there must 
always previously be something that is completely certain, and 
not invented 4 or merely a matter of opinion, namely, the 
possibility of the object itself. Once that is established, it is 
then permissible to have recourse to opinion in regard to its 
actuality; but this opinion, if it is not to be groundless, must 
be brought into connection with what is actually given and so 
far certain, as serving to account for what is thus given. Then, 
and only then, can the supposition be entitled an hypothesis. 

As we cannot form the least conception a priori of the 
possibility of dynamical connection, and as the categories 5 
of the pure understanding do not suffice for devising any such 
conception, but only for apprehending it when met with in 
experience, we cannot, in accordance with these categories, 
creatively imagine 6 any object in terms of any new quality 
that does not allow of being given in experience; and we 
cannot, therefore, make use of such an object in any legiti- 
mate hypothesis; otherwise we should be resting reason on 
empty figments of the brain, 7 and not on concepts of things. 
Thus it is not permissible to invent any new original powers, 
as, for instance, an understanding capable of intuiting its 
objects without the aid of senses; or a force of attraction with- 
out any contact; or a new kind of substance existing in space 
and yet not impenetrable. Nor is it legitimate to postulate 
a form of communion of substances which is different from 
any revealed in experience, a presence that is not spatial, |g ^* 
a duration that is not temporal. In a word, our reason can 
employ as conditions of the possibility of things only the 
conditions of possible experience; it can never proceed to 
form concepts of things quite independently of these con- 
ditions. Such concepts, though not self-contradictory, would 
be without an object. 

1 [zu dichten und zu meinen.] 2 [schwdrmen.} 

8 [dichten soil.} * [erdichtet.] 

5 [Reading^ with Vorlander, Kategoricn . . . dienen for Kategorie . . . dient.} 

6 \ursp*inglich aussinnen.} 7 [leerc*Hirngespinste.] 



614 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

The concepts of reason are, as we have said, mere ideas, 
and have no object that can be met with in any experience. 
None the less they do not on this account signify objects 
that having been invented are thereupon assumed to be 
possible. They are thought only problematically, in order 
that upon them (as heuristic fictions), we may base regu- 
lative principles of the systematic employment of the under- 
standing in the field of experience. Save in this connection 
they are merely thought-entities, 1 the possibility of which is 
not demonstrable, and which therefore do not allow of being 
employed, in the character of hypotheses, in explanation of 
the actual appearances. It is quite permissible to think the 
soul as simple, in order, in conformity with this idea, to employ 
as the principle of our interpretation of its inner appearances 
a complete and necessary unity of all its faculties; and this in 
spite of the fact that this unity is such as can never be appre- 
hended in concrete. But to assume the soul as a simple sub- 
stance (a transcendent concept), would be [to propound] a 
A 772J proposition which is not only indemonstrable as is the case 
with many physical hypotheses but is hazarded in a quite 
blind and arbitrary fashion. For the simple can never be 
met with in any experience whatsoever; and if by substance 
be here meant the permanent object of sensible intuition, the 
possibility of a simple appearance is quite incomprehensible. 
Reason does not afford any sufficient ground for assuming, 
[even] as a matter of opinion, merely intelligible beings, or 
merely intelligible properties of things belonging to the sen- 
sible world, although (as we have no concepts of their pos- 
sibility or impossibility) we also cannot lay claim to any insight 
that justifies us in dogmatically denying them. 

In the explanation of given appearances, no things or 
grounds of explanation can be adduced other than those 
which have been found to stand in connection with given 
appearances in accordance with the already known laws of the 
appearances. A transcendental hypothesis, in which a mere 
idea of reason is used in explanation of natural existences, 2 
would really be no explanation; so to proceed would be to 
explain something, which in terms of known empirical prin- 
ciples we do not understand sufficiently, by something which 

1 \Gedanktndinge .] * [Naturdinge.] 



THE DISCIPLINE OF PURE REASON 615 

we do not understand at all. Moreover, the principle of such 
an hypothesis would at most serve only for the satisfaction of 
reason, not for the furtherance of the employment of the 
understanding in respect of objects. Order and purposiveness 
in nature must themselves be explained from natural grounds 
and according to natural laws; and the wildest hypotheses, if {3 801 
only they are physical, are here more tolerable than a hyper- 
physical hypothesis, such as the appeal to a divine Author, 
assumed simply in order that we may have an explanation. 
That would be a principle of ignava ratio; for we should be 
passing over all causes the objective reality of which, at least 
as regards their possibility, can be ascertained in the course 
of experience, in order to rest in a mere idea an idea that is 
very comforting to reason. As regards the absolute totality of 
the ground of explanation of the series of these causes, such 
totality need suggest no difficulty in respect of natural exist- 
ences; 1 since these existences are nothing but appearances, we 
need never look to them for any kind of completeness 2 in the 
synthesis of the series of conditions. 

It can never be permissible, in the speculative employment 
of reason, to resort to transcendental hypotheses, and to pre- 
sume that we can make good the lack of physical grounds of 
explanation by appealing to the hyperphysical. The objection 
to such procedure is twofold: partly, that reason, so far from 
being in the least advanced thereby, is cut off from all progress 
in its own employment; partly, that this license would in the 
end deprive reason of all the fruits that spring from the cul- 
tivation of its own proper domain, namely, that of experience. 
For whenever the explanation of natural existences is found 
to be difficult, there is always at hand a transcendental ground 
of explanation which relieves us from further investigation, | V* 
and our enquiry is brought to an end not through insight, but 
by the aid of a principle which while utterly incomprehensible 
has from the start been so constructed as necessarily to con- 
tain the concept of what is absolutely primordial. 

The second requirement for the admissibility of an hypo- 
thesis is its adequacy in accounting a priori for those con- 
sequences which are \de facto} given. If for this purpose we 
have to call in auxiliary hypotheses, they give rise to the sus- 

, l \Weltobjekte^ * {etwaf Vollendetes.} 



616 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

picion that they are mere fictions; for each of them requires the 
same justification as is necessary in the case of the fundamental 
hypothesis, and they are not, therefore, in a position to bear 
reliable testimony. If we assume an absolutely perfect cause, 
we need not be at a loss in explaining the purposiveness, order, 
and vastness which are displayed in the world; but in view of 
what, judged at least by our concepts, are the obvious devia- 
tions and evils, other new hypotheses are required in order to 
uphold the original hypothesis in face of the objections which 
these suggest. If the simple self-sufficiency of the human soul 
has been employed to account for its appearances, it is contro- 
verted by certain difficulties, due to those phenomena which 
are similar to the changes that take place in matter (growth 
and decay), and we have therefore to seek the aid of new 
hypotheses, which are not indeed without plausibility, but 
B 80* I w hi cn Y et have no credentials save what is conferred upon 
them by that opinion the fundamental hypothesis which* 
they have themselves been called in to support. 

If the instances here cited as examples of the assertions 
made by reason the incorporeal unity of the soul and the 
existence of a supreme being are propounded not as hypo-* 
theses, but as dogmas proved a priori^ I am not at present 
concerned with them, save to remark that in that case care 
must be taken that the proof has the apodeictic certainty of a 
demonstration. For to set out to show no more than that the 
reality of such ideas is probable is as absurd as to think of 
proving a proposition of geometry merely as a probability. 
Reason, when employed apart from all experience, can know 
propositions entirely a priori, and as necessary, or it can know 
nothing at all. Its judgments, therefore, are never opinions; 
either it must abstain from all judgment, or must affirm with 
apodeictic certainty. Opinions and probable judgments as to 
what belongs to things can be propounded only in explana- 
tion of what is actually given, or as consequences that follow 
in accordance with empirical laws from what underlies the 
actually given. They are therefore concerned only with the 
series of the objects of experience. Outside this field, to form 
opinions is merely to play with thoughts. For we should then 
have to presuppose yet another opinion the opinion that we 
may perhaps arrive, at the truth by a road that is 'uncertain. 



THE DISCIPLINE OF PURE REASON 617 

But although, in dealing with the merely speculative ques- | B 
tions of pure reason, hypotheses are not available for the 
purposes of basing propositions upon them, they are yet entirely 
permissible for the purposes of defending propositions; that is 
to say, they may not be employed in any dogmatic, but only in 
polemical fashion. By the defence of propositions I do not 
mean the addition of fresh grounds for their assertion, but 
merely the nullifying of the sophistical arguments by which 
our opponent professes to invalidate this assertion. Now all 
synthetic propositions of pure reason have this peculiarity, that 
while in asserting the reality of this or that idea we can never 
have knowledge sufficient to give certainty to our proposition, 
our opponent is just as little able to assert the opposite. This 
equality of fortune [in the ventures] of human reason does not, 
in speculative modes of knowledge, favour either of the two 
parties, and it is consequently the fitting battle-ground for 
ttieir never-ending feuds. But as will be shown, reason has, in 
respect of its practical e mploy ment, the right to postulate what 
in the field of mere speculation it can have no kind of right 
to assume without sufficient proof. For while all such assump- 
tions do violence to [the principle of] completeness of specu- 
lation, that is a principle with which the practical interest is 
not at all concerned. In the practical sphere reason has rights 
of possession, of which it does not require to offer proof, and of 
which, in fact, it could not supply proof. The burden of proof |g 
accordingly rests upon the opponent. But since the latter knows 
just as little of the object under question, in trying to prove its 
non-existence, as does the former in maintaining its reality, 
it is evident that the former, who is asserting something as a 
practically necessary supposition, is at an advantage (melior 
est conditio possidentis). For he is at liberty to employ, as it 
were in self-defence, on behalf of his own good cause, the very 
same weapons that his opponent employs against that cause, 
that is, hypotheses. These are not intended to strengthen the 
proof of his position, but only to show that the opposing party 
has much too little understanding of the matter in dispute 
to allow of his flattering himself that he has the advantage 
in respect of speculative insight. 

Hypotheses are therefore, in the domain of pure reason, 
permissible* only as weapons of war, and qnly for the purpose 



6i8 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

of defending a right, not in order to establish it. But the oppos- 
ing party we must always look for in ourselves. For specula- 
tive reason in its transcendental employment is in itself 
dialectical; the objections which we have to fear lie in our- 
selves. We must seek them out, just as we would do in the 
case of claims that, while old, have never become superannu- 
ated, in order that by annulling them we may establish a 
permanent peace. External quiescence is merely specious. 
The root of these disturbances, which lies deep in the nature 
B 806 } ^ numan reason, must be removed. But how can we do so, 
unless we give it freedom, nay, nourishment, to send out 
shoots so that it may discover itself to our eyes, and that it 
may then be entirely destroyed? We must, therefore, bethink 
ourselves of objections which have never yet occurred to any 
opponent, and indeed lend him our weapons, and grant him 
the most favourable position which he could possibly desire. 
We have nothing to fear in all this, but much to hope for;' 
namely, that we may gain for ourselves a possession which 
can never again be contested. 

Thus for our complete equipment we require among other 
things the hypotheses of pure reason. For although they are 
but leaden weapons, since they are not steeled by any law of ex- 
perience, they are yet as effective as those which our opponents 
can employ against us. If, therefore, having assumed (in some 
non-speculative connection) the nature of the soul to be im- 
material and not subject to any corporeal change, we are met 
by the difficulty that nevertheless experience seems to prove 
that the exaltation and the derangement of our mental powers 
are alike in being merely diverse modifications of our organs, 
we can weaken the force of this proof by postulating that our 
body may be nothing more than a fundamental appearance 
which in this our present state (in this life) serves as a condition 
of our whole faculty of sensibility, and therewith of all our 
thought, and that separation from the body may therefore 
be regarded as the end of this sensible employment of our 
faculty of knowledge and the beginning of its intellectual 
employment. Thus regarded, the body would not be the cause 
of thought, but merely a restrictive condition of it, and there- 
fore, while indeed furthering the sensible and animal life, it 
would because of tfris very fact have to be considered a hind- 



THE DISCIPLINE OF PURE REASON 619 

ranee to the pure and spiritual life. The dependence of the 
animal and sensible upon the bodily constitution would then 
in nowise prove the dependence of our entire life upon the 
state of our organs. We might go yet further, and discover 
quite new objections, which either have never been suggested 
or have never been sufficiently developed. 

Generation, in man as in non-rational creatures, is de- 
pendent upon opportunity, often indeed upon sufficiency of 
food, upon the moods and caprices of rulers, nay, even upon 
vice. And this makes it very difficult to suppose that a creature 
whose life has its first beginning in circumstances so trivial 
and so entirely dependent upon our own choice, should have 
an existence that extends to all eternity. As regards the con- 
tinuance (here on earth) of the species as a whole, this diffi- 
culty is negligible, since accident in the individual case is still 
subject to a general law, but as regards each individual it 
certainly seems highly questionable to expect so potent an 
effect from causes so insignificant. But to meet these objec- 
tions we can propound a transcendental hypothesis, namely, 
that all life is, strictly speaking, intelligible only, is not sub- 
'ject to changes of time, and neither begins in birth nor ends |g g g 
in death; that 1 this life is an appearance only, that is, a sen- 
sible representation of the purely spiritual life, and that the 
whole sensible world is a mere picture 2 which in our present 
mode of knowledge hovers before us, and like a dream has 
in itself no objective reality; that if we could intuit our- 
selves and things as they are, we should see ourselves in 
a world of spiritual beings, 3 our sole and true community 
with which has not begun through birth and will not cease 
through bodily death both birth and death being mere 
appearances. 

Now of all this we have not the least knowledge. We plead 
it only in hypothetical fashion, to meet the attack; we are not 
actually asserting it. For it is not even an idea of reason, but 
is a concept devised merely for the purposes of self-defence. 
None the less we are here proceeding in entire conformity 
with reason. Our opponent falsely represents the absence of 
empirical conditions as itself amounting to proof of the total 

1 [Reading, with Valentiner, werde; dass for werde. Dass.] 
* * [etn blosses Btld.] * [geistiger Naturen.] 



620 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

impossibility of our belief, and is therefore proceeding on 
the assumption that he has exhausted all the possibilities. 
What we are doing is merely to show that it is just as little 
possible for him to comprehend the whole field of possible 
things through mere laws of experience as it is for us to reach, 
outside experience, any conclusions justifiable for our reason. 
Anyone who employs such hypothetical means of defence 

B 800} a g ams t the rash and presumptuous negations of his opponent 
must not be considered to intend the adoption of these opinions 
as his own; he abandons them, as soon as he has disposed 
of the dogmatic pretensions of his opponent. For though 
a merely negative attitude to the assertions of others may 
seem very modest and moderate, to proceed to represent 
the objections to an assertion as proofs of the counter-asser- 
tion is to make claims no less presumptuous and visionary 
than if the positive position and its affirmations had been 
adopted. 

It is evident, therefore, that in the speculative employment 
of reason hypotheses, regarded as opinions, have no validity 
in themselves, but only relatively to the transcendent pre- 
tensions of the opposite party. For to make principles of pos-' 
sible experience conditions of the possibility of things in general 
is just as transcendent a procedure as to assert the objective 
reality of [transcendent] concepts, the objects of which can- 
not be found anywhere save outside the limits of all possible 
experience. What pure reason judges assertorically, must 
(like everything that reason knows) be necessary; otherwise 
nothing at all is asserted. Accordingly, pure reason does 
not, in point of fact, contain any opinions whatsoever. The 
hypotheses, above referred to, are merely problematic judg- 
ments, which at least cannot be refuted, although they do 

B 810} not indeed allow of any proof. They are therefore nothing 
but * private opinions. Nevertheless, we cannot properly dis- 
pense with them as weapons against the misgivings which 
are apt to occur; they are necessary even to secure our inner 
tranquillity. We must preserve to them this character, care- 
fully guarding against the assumption of their independent 
authority or absolute validity, since otherwise they would 
drown reason in fictions and delusions. 

1 [Reading, with Hartenstein, reine for keine^\ 



THE DISCIPLINE OF PURE REASON 621 

CHAPTER I 
Section 4 

THE DISCIPLINE OF PURE REASON IN REGARD TO ITS 
PROOFS 

What distinguishes the proofs of transcendental synthetic 
propositions from all other proofs which yield an a priori 
synthetic knowledge is that, in the case of the former, reason 
may not apply itself, by means of its concepts, directly to the 
object, but must first establish the objective validity of the 
concepts and the possibility of their a priori synthesis. This 
rule is not made necessary merely by considerations of prud- 
ence, but is essential to the very possibility of the proofs them- 
selves. If I am to pass a priori beyond the concept of an object, 
I can do so only with the help of some special guidance, 
supplied from outside this concept. In mathematics it is a 
briori intuition which guides my synthesis; and thereby all 
our conclusions can be drawn immediately from pure intuition. 
'In transcendental knowledge, so long as we are concerned 
only with concepts of the understanding, our guide is the 
possibility of experience. Such proof does not show that the 
given concept (for instance, of that which happens) leads 
directly to another concept (that of a cause); for such a transi- 
tion would be a saltus which could not be justified. The proof 
proceeds by showing that experience itself, and therefore the 
object of experience, would be impossible without a connec- 
tion of this kind. Accordingly, the proof must also at the 
same time show the possibility of arriving synthetically 
and a priori at some knowledge of things which was not 
contained in the concepts of them. Unless this requirement 
be met, the proofs, like streams which break their banks, 
run wildly at random, whithersoever the current of hidden 
association may chance to lead them. The semblance of con- 
viction which rests upon subjective causes of association, 
and which is regarded as insight into a natural affinity, can- 
not balance the misgivings to which so hazardous a course 
must rightly give rise. On this account, all attempts to prove 
the principle of sufficient reason have, by the universal ad- 



622 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

mission of those concerned, been fruitless; and prior to our 
own transcendental criticism it was considered better, since 
that principle could not be surrendered, boldly to appeal to 
the common sense of mankind an expedient which always 

B 812} * s a s * n t ^ iat t ^ le cause f reason is i n desperate straits 
rather than to attempt new dogmatic proofs. 

But if the proposition to be proved is an assertion of pure 
reason, and if I am therefore proposing to pass beyond my em- 
pirical concepts by means of mere ideas, justification of such a 
step in synthesis (supposing it to be possible) is all the more 
necessary as a precondition of any attempt to prove the proposi- 
tion itself. However plausible the alleged proof of the simple 
nature of our thinking substance, derived from the unity of 
apperception, may be, it is faced by the unavoidable difficulty, 
that since the [notion of] absolute simplicity is not a concept 
which can be immediately related to a perception, but, as an 
idea, would have to be inferred, there can be no understanding 
how the bare consciousness (which is, or at least can be, 
contained in all thought), though it is indeed so far a simple 
representation, should conduct us to the consciousness and the 
knowledge of a thing in which thought alone can be contained: 
If I represent to myself the power of a 1 body in motion, it is 
so far for me absolute unity, and my representation of it is 
simple; and I can therefore express this representation by the 
motion of a point for the volume of the body is not here a 
relevant consideration, and can bethought, without diminution 
of the moving power, as small as we please, and therefore even 

^ j^5 j as existing in a point. But I may not therefore conclude that 
if nothing be given to me but the moving power of a body, the 
body can be thought as simple substance merely because its 
representation abstracts from the magnitude of its volume 
and is consequently simple. The simple arrived at by abstrac- 
tion is entirely different from the simple as an object; though 
the T, taken in abstraction, can contain in itself KQ manifold, 
in its other meaning, as signifying the soul itself, it can be a 
highly complex concept, as containing under itself, and as 
denoting, what is very composite. 2 I thus detect in these 
arguments a paralogism. But in order to be armed against this 

1 [Reading, with Hartenstein, eines for meines.} 
8 \sekr vieles.] 



THE DISCIPLINE OF PURE REASON 623 

paralogism (for without some forewarning we should not 
entertain any suspicion in regard to the proof), it is indis- 
pensably necessary to have constantly at hand a criterion of 
the possibility of those synthetic propositions which are in- 
tended to prove more than experience yields. This criterion 
consists in the requirement that proof should not proceed 
directly to the desired predicate but only by means of a prin- 
ciple that will demonstrate the possibility of extending our 
given concept in an a priori manner to ideas, and of 
realising the latter. If this precaution be always observed, if 
before attempting any proof, we discreetly take thought as to 
how, and with what ground for hope, we may expect such an 
extension through pure reason, and whence, in such a case, 
this insight, which is not developed from concepts, and | B g I4 
also cannot be anticipated in reference to any possible ex- 
perience, is yet to be derived, we can by so doing spare our- 
'selves much difficult and yet fruitless labour, not expecting 
from reason what obviously exceeds its power or rather, since 
reason, when obsessed by passionate desire for the speculative 
enlargement of its domain, is not easily to be restrained, by 
subjecting it to the discipline of self-control. 

The first rule is, therefore, not to attempt any tran- 
scendental proofs until we have considered, with a view to 
obtaining justification for them, from what source we propose 
to derive the principles on which the proofs are to be based, 
and with what right we may expect success in our inferences. 
If they are principles of the understanding (for instance, that of 
causality), it is useless to attempt, by means of them, to attain 
to ideas of pure reason; such principles are valid only for 
objects of possible experience. If they are principles of pure 
reason, it is again labour lost. Reason has indeed principles 
of its own; but regarded as objective principles, they are one 
and all dialectical, and can have no validity save as regulative 
principles for its employment in experience, with a view to 
making experience systematically coherent. But if such pro- 
fessed proofs are propounded, we must meet their deceptive 
power of persuasion with the non liquet of our matured 
judgment; and although we may not be able to detect the 
illusion involved, we are yet entirely within our rights in 
demanding* a deduction of the principles ^employed in them; 



624 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

and if these principles have their source in reason alone, 
the demand is one which can never be met. And there is 
thus no need for us to concern ourselves with the particular 
nature and with the refutation of each and every ground- 
less illusion; at the tribunal of a critical reason, which insists 
upon laws, this entire dialectic, so inexhaustible in its artifices, 
can be disposed of in bulk. 

The second peculiarity of transcendental proofs is that 
only one proof can be found for each transcendental proposi- 
tion. If I am inferring not from concepts but from the intuition 
which corresponds to a concept, be it a pure intuition as in 
mathematics, or an empirical intuition as in natural science, 
the intuition which serves as the basis of the inference supplies 
me with manifold material for synthetic propositions, material 
which I can connect in more than one way, so that, as it is 
permissible for me to start from more than one point, I can 
arrive at the same proposition by different paths. 

In the case of transcendental propositions, however, we 
start always from one concept only, and assert the synthetic 
condition of the possibility of the object in accordance with 
this concept. Since outside this concept there is nothing 
further through which the object could be determined, there 
B 8I6J can tnere f re b e on ty one ground of proof. The proof can 
contain nothing more than the determination of an object in 
general in accordance with this one single concept. In the 
Transcendental Analytic, for instance, we derived the prin- 
ciple that everything which happens has a cause, from the 
condition under which alone a concept of happening in general 
is objectively possible namely, by showing that the determina- 
tion of an event in time, and therefore the event as belonging 
to experience, would be impossible save as standing under such 
a dynamical rule. This is the sole possible ground of proof; for 
the event, in being represented, has objective validity, that is, 
truth, only in so far as an object is determined for the concept 
by means of the law of causality. Other proofs of this principle 
have, indeed, been attempted, for instance, from the con- 
tingency [of that which happens]. But on examining this 
argument, we can discover no mark of contingency save only 
the happening, that is, the existence of the object preceded 
by its non-existence, and thus are brought back to the same 



THE DISCIPLINE OF PURE REASON 62$ 

ground of proof as before. Similarly, if the proposition, that 
everything which thinks is simple, is to be proved, we leave 
out of account the manifold of thought, and hold only to the 
concept of the T, which is simple and to which all thought 
is related. The same is true of the transcendental proof of the 
existence of God; it is based solely on the coincidence 1 of the | B 3^ 
concepts of the most real being and of necessary being, and 
is not to be looked for anywhere else. 

This caution reduces the criticism of the assertions of 
reason to very small compass. When reason is conducting 
its business through concepts only, there is but one possible 
proof, if, that is to say, there be any possible proof at all. If, 
therefore, we observe the dogmatist coming forward with ten 
proofs, we can be quite sure that he really has none. For had 
he one that yielded as must always be required in matters of 
pure reason apodeictic proof, what need would he have of 
the others? His purpose can only be that of the parliamentary 
advocate, who intends his various arguments for different 
groups, in order to take advantage of the weakness of those 
before whom he is pleading hearers who, without entering 
'deeply into the matter, desire to be soon quit of it, and there- 
fore seize upon whatever may first happen to attract their at- 
tention, and decide accordingly. 

The third rule peculiar to pure reason, in so far as it is to 
be subjected to a discipline in respect of transcendental proofs, 
is that its proofs must never be apagogical, but always osten- 
sive. The direct or ostensive proof, in every kind of knowledge, 
is that which combines with the conviction of its truth insight 
into the sources of its truth; the apagogical proof, on the other 
hand, while it can indeed yield certainty, cannot enable us 
to comprehend truth in its connection with the grounds of its 
possibility. The latter is therefore to be regarded rather as a {3 gi8 
last resort than as a mode of procedure which satisfies all the 
requirements of reason. In respect of convincing power, it has, 
however, this advantage over the direct proofs, that contradic- 
tion always carries with it more clearness of representation than 
the best connection, and so approximates to the intuitional 
certainty of a demonstration. 

The real reason why apagogical proofs are employed in 

1 [Reziprokabilitat.] 

2S 



626 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

various sciences would seem to be this. When the grounds 
from which this or that knowledge has to be derived are too 
numerous or too deeply concealed, we try whether we may not 
arrive at the knowledge in question through its consequences. 
Now this modus ponens, that is, the inference to the truth of an 
assertion from the truth of its consequences, is only permissible 
when all its possible consequences are [known to be] true; for 
in that case there is only one possible ground for this being 
so, and that ground must also be true. But this procedure 
is impracticable; to discover all possible consequences of 
any given proposition exceeds our powers. None the less this 
mode of reasoning is resorted to, although indeed with a cer- 
tain special modification, when we endeavour to prove some- 
thing merely as an hypothesis. The modification made is that 
we admit the conclusion as holding according to analogy, 
namely, on the ground that if all the many consequences 
examined by us agree with an assumed ground, all other 
possible consequences will also agree with it. But from the 
B 8?o} nature f tne argument, it is obvious that an hypothesis can 
never, on such evidence, be transformed into demonstrated 
truth. The modus tollens of reasoning, which proceeds from 
consequences to their grounds, is not only a quite rigorous but 
also an extremely easy mode of proof. For if even a single false 
consequence can be drawn from a proposition, the proposition 
is itself false. Instead, then, as in an ostensive proof, of re- 
viewing the whole series of grounds that can lead us to the 
truth of a proposition, by means of a complete insight into its 
possibility, we require only to show that a single one of the 
consequences resulting from its opposite is false, in order to 
prove that this opposite is itself false, and that the proposition 
which we had to prove is therefore true. 

The apagogic method of proof is, however, permissible 
only in those sciences where it is impossible mistakenly to 
substitute what is subjective in our representations for what is 
objective, that is, for the knowledge of that which is in the 
object. Where such substitution tends to occur, it must often 
happen that the opposite of a given proposition contradicts 
only the subjective conditions of thought, and not the object, 
or that the two propositions contradict each other only under 
a subjective condition which is falsely treated as being object- 



THE DISCIPLINE OF PURE REASON 627 

ive; the condition being false, both can be false, without it 
being possible to infer from the falsity of the one to the truth of 
the other. 

In mathematics this subreption is impossible; and it is {gg^o 
there, therefore, that apagogical proofs have their true place. 
In natural science, where all our knowledge is based upon 
empirical intuitions, the subreption can generally be guarded 
against through repeated comparison of observations; but in 
this field this mode of proof is for the most part of little im- 
portance. The transcendental enterprises of pure reason, 
however, are one and all carried on within the domain proper 
to dialectical illusion, that is, within the domain of the sub- 
jective, which in its premisses presents itself to reason, nay, 
forces itself upon reason, as being objective. In this field, there- 
fore, it can never be permissible, so far as synthetic propositions 
are concerned, to justify assertions by disproving their opposite. 
For either this refutation is nothing but the mere representa- 
tion of the conflict of the opposite opinion with the subjective 
conditions under which alone anything can be conceived by 
our reason, which does not in the least contribute to the dis- 
proof of the thing itself just as, for instance, we must recog- 
nise that while the unconditioned necessity of the existence of 
a being is altogether inconceivable to us, and that every 
speculative proof of a necessary supreme being is therefore 
rightly to be opposed on subjective grounds, we have yet no 
right to deny the possibility of such a primordial being in 
itself or else both parties, those who adopt the affirmative 
no less than those who adopt the negative position, have 
been deceived by transcendental illusion, and base their asser- 
tions upon an impossible concept of the object. In that case 
we can apply the rule: non entis nulla sunt predicata\ that |~ Z 9 3 
is, all that is asserted of the object, whether affirmatively or 
negatively, is erroneous, and consequently we cannot arrive 
apagogically at knowledge of the truth through refutation of 
the opposite. If, for instance, it be assumed that the sensible 
world is given in itself in its totality, it is false that it must be 
either infinite in space or finite and limited. Both contentions 
are false. For appearances (as mere representations) which yet 
are to be given in themselves (as objects) are something impos- 
sible; anji though the infinitude of this imaginary whole would 



S528 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

indeed be unconditioned, it would contradict (since everything 
in appearances is conditioned) the unconditioned determina- 
tion of magnitude, [that is, of totality], which is presupposed 
in the concept. 

The apagogic method of proof is the real deluding influ- 
ence by which those who reason dogmatically have always held 
their admirers. It may be compared to a champion who seeks 
to uphold the honour and incontestable rights of his adopted 
party by offering battle to all who would question them. Such 
boasting proves nothing, however, in regard to the merits of the 
issue but only in regard to the respective strength of the com- 
batants, and this indeed only in respect of those who take the 
offensive. The spectators, observing that each party is alter- 
B 822} na t e ly conqueror and conquered, are often led to have scep- 
tical doubts in regard to the very object of the dispute. They 
are not, however, justified in adopting such an attitude; it is 
sufficient to declare to the combatants: non defensoribus istis 
tempus eget* Everyone must defend his position directly, by a 
legitimate proof that carries with it a transcendental deduction 
of the grounds upon which it is itself made to rest. Only when 
this has been done, are we in a position to decide how far its 
claims allow of rational justification. If an opponent relies on 
subjective grounds, it is an easy matter to refute him. The 
dogmatist cannot, however, profit by this advantage. His own 
judgments are, as a rule, no less dependent upon subjective 
influences; and he can himself in turn be similarly cornered by 
his opponent. But if both parties proceed by the direct method, 
either they will soon discover the difficulty, nay, the impossi- 
bility, of showing ground for their assertions, and will be left 
with no resort save to appeal to some form of prescriptive 
authority; or our criticism will easily discover the illusion to 
which their dogmatic procedure is due, compelling pure 
reason to relinquish its exaggerated pretensions in the realm 
of speculation, and to withdraw within the limits of its proper 
territory that of practical principles. 



THE TRANSCENDENTAL DOCTRINE OF METHOD 
CHAPTER II 

THE CANON OF PURE REASON 

IT is humiliating to human reason that it achieves nothing in 
its pure employment, and indeed stands in need of a discipline 
to check its extravagances, and to guard it against the decep- 
tions which arise therefrom. But, on the other hand, reason 
is reassured and gains self-confidence, on finding that it itself 
c^n and must apply this discipline, and that it is not called 
upon to submit to any outside censorship; and, moreover, that 
the limits which it is compelled to set to its speculative employ- 
ment likewise limit the pseudo-rational pretensions of all its 
opponents, and that it can secure against all attacks whatever 
may remain over from its former exaggerated claims. The 
greatest and perhaps the sole use of all philosophy of pure 
reason is therefore only negative; since it serves not as an 
organon for the extension but as a discipline for the limitation 
of pure reason, and, instead of discovering truth, has only the 
modest merit of guarding against error. 

There must, however, be some source of positive modes of 
knowledge which belong to the domain of pure reason, and 
which, it may be, give occasion to error solely owing to mis- 
understanding, while yet in actual fact they form the goal to- |g 824 
wards which reason is directing its efforts. How else can we 
account for our inextinguishable desire to find firm footing 
somewhere beyond the limits of experience? Reason has a pre- 
sentiment of objects which possess a great interest for it. But 
when it follows the path of pure speculation, in order to ap- 
proach them, they fly before it. Presumably it may look for 
better fortune in the only other path which still remains open 
to it, th^t of its practical employment. 

629 



630 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

I understand by a canon the sum-total of the a priori prin- 
ciples of the correct employment of certain faculties of know- 
ledge. Thus general logic, in its analytic portion, is a canon 
for understanding and reason in general; but only in regard 
to their form; it abstracts from all content. The transcendental 
analytic has similarly been shown to be the canon of the pure 
understanding-^ for understanding alone is capable of true syn- 
thetic modes of knowledge a priori. But when no correct em- 
ployment of a faculty of knowledge is possible there is no 
canon. Now all synthetic knowledge through pure reason in 
its speculative employment is, as has been shown by the proofs 
given, completely impossible. There is therefore no canon of 
its speculative employment; such employment is entirely dia- 
lectical. All transcendental logic is, in this respect, simply a 
B 825} Discipline. Consequently, if there be any correct employment 
of pure reason, in which case there must be a canon of its 
employment, the canon will deal not with the speculative but 
with the practical employment of reason. This practical em- 
ployment of reason we shall now proceed to investigate. 



THE CANON OF PURE REASON 
Section i 

THE ULTIMATE END OF THE PURE EMPLOYMENT OF 
OUR REASON 

Reason is impelled by a tendency of its nature to go out 
beyond the field of its empirical employment, and to venture 
in a pure employment, by means of ideas alone, to the utmost 
limits of all knowledge, and not to be satisfied save through 
the completion of its course in [the apprehension of] a self- 
subsistent systematic whole. Is this endeavour the outcome 
merely of the speculative interests of reason? Must we not 
rather regard it as having its source exclusively in the prac- 
tical interests of reason? 

I shall, for the moment, leave aside all question as to the 
success which attends pure reason in its speculative exercise, 
and enquire only as to the problems the solution of which 



THE CANON OF PURE REASON 631 

constitutes its ultimate aim, whether reached or not, and in 
respect of which all other aims are to be regarded only as 
means. These highest aims must, from the nature of reason, {3 826 
have a certain unity, in order that they may, as thus unified, 
further that interest of humanity which is subordinate to no 
higher interest. 

The ultimate aim to which the speculation of reason in its 
transcendental employment is directed concerns three objects: 
the freedom of the will, the immortality of the soul, and the 
existence of God. In respect of all three the merely speculative 
interest of reason is very small; and for its sake alone we should 
hardly have undertaken the labour of transcendental investiga- 
tion a labour so fatiguing in its endless wrestling with in- 
superable difficulties since whatever discoveries might be 
made in regard to these matters, we should not be able to make 
use of them in any helpful manner in concrete, that is, in the 
study of nature. If the will be free, this can have a bearing only 
on the intelligible cause of our volition. For as regards the phe- 
nomena of its outward expressions, that is, of our actions, we 
must account for them in accordance with a maxim which 
Is inviolable, and which is so fundamental that without it we 
should not be able to employ reason in any empirical manner 
whatsoever in the same manner as all other appearances of 
nature, namely, in conformity with unchangeable laws. If, 
again, we should be able to obtain insight into the spiritual 
nature of the soul, and therewith of its immortality, we could 
make no use of such insight in explaining either the appear- 
ances of this present life or the specific nature of a future | B 3^7 
state. For our concept of an incorporeal nature is merely nega- 
tive, and does not in the least extend our knowledge, yielding 
no sufficient material for inferences, save only such as are 
merely fictitious and cannot be sanctioned by philosophy. If, 
thirdly, the existence of a supreme intelligence be proved, by 
its means we might indeed render what is purposive in the 
constitution and ordering of the world comprehensible in a 
general sort of way, but we should not be in the least war- 
ranted in deriving from it any particular arrangement or dis- 
position, or in boldly inferring any such, where it is not per- 
ceived. For it is a necessary rule of the speculative employment 
of reason, hot to pass over natural causeg, and, abandoning 



632 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

that in regard to which we can be instructed by experience, to 
deduce something which we know from something which en- 
tirely transcends all our [possible] knowledge. In short, these 
three propositions are for speculative reason always tran- 
scendent, and allow of no immanent employment that is, 
employment in reference to objects of experience, and so in 
some manner really of service to us but are in themselves, 
notwithstanding the very heavy labours which they impose 
upon our reason, entirely useless. 

If, then, these three cardinal propositions are not in any 
way necessary for knowledge^ and are yet strongly recom- 
B 823} men ded by our reason, their importance, properly regarded, 
must concern only the practical. 

By 'the practical' I mean everything that is possible 
through freedom. When, however, the conditions of the exer- 
cise of our free will are empirical, reason can have no other 
than a regulative employment in regard to it, and can serve' 
only to effect unity in its empirical laws. Thus, for instance, 
in the precepts of prudence, the whole business of reason 
consists in uniting all the ends which are prescribed to us by 
our desires in the one single end, happiness^ and in co- 1 
ordinating the means for attaining it. In this field, therefore, 
reason can supply none but pragmatic laws of free action, for 
the attainment of those ends which are commended to us by 
the senses; it cannot yield us laws that are pure and deter- 
mined completely a priori. Laws of this latter type, pure prac- 
tical laws, whose end is given through reason completely a 
priori^ and which are prescribed to us not in an empirically 
conditioned but in an absolute manner, would be products of 
pure reason. Such are the moral laws; and these alone, there- 
fore, belong to the practical employment of reason, and allow 
of a canon. 

The whole equipment of reason, in the discipline which 
may be entitled pure philosophy, is in fact determined with 
a view to the three above-mentioned problems. These, how- 
ever, themselves in turn refer us yet further, namely, to the 
problem what we ought to do, if the will is free, if there is 
go 01 } a God and a future world. As this concerns our attitude to 
the supreme end, it is evident that the ultimate intention 
of nature in her wise provision for us has indeo^ in the 



THE CANON OF PURE REASON 635 

constitution of our reason, been directed to moral interests 
alone. 1 

But we must be careful, in turning our attention to an 
object which is foreign" to transcendental philosophy, that we 
do not indulge in digressions to the detriment of the unity of 
the system, nor on the other hand, by saying too little on this 
new topic, fail in producing conviction through lack of clear- 
ness. I hope to avoid both dangers, by keeping as close as 
possible to the transcendental, and by leaving entirely aside 
any psychological, that is, empirical, factors that may per- 
chance accompany it. 

I must first remark that for the present I shall employ the 
concept of freedom in this practical sense only, leaving aside 
that other transcendental meaning which cannot be empiric- 
ally made use of in explanation of appearances, but is itself | B g* 
a problem for reason, as has been already shown. A will is 
purely animal (arbitrium brutum), which cannot be deter- 
mined save through sensuous 2 impulses, that is, pathologically. 
A will which can be determined independently of sensuous 
impulses, and therefore through motives which are repre- 
sented only by reason, is entitled freewill (arbitrium liberum), 
and everything which is bound up with this will, whether as 
ground or as consequence, is entitled practical. [The fact of] 
practical freedom can be proved through experience. For the 
human will is not determined by that alone which stimulates, 
that is, immediately affects the senses; we have the power to 
overcome the impressions on our faculty of sensuous desire, by 
calling up representations of what, in a more indirect manner, 
is useful or injurious. But these considerations, as to what is 
desirable in respect of our whole state, that is, as to what is 
good and useful, are based on reason. Reason therefore provides 

All practical concepts relate to objects of satisfaction or dis- 
satisfaction, that is, of pleasure and pain, and therefore, at least 
indirectly, to the objects of our feelings. But as feeling is not a faculty 
whereby we represent things, but lies outside our whole faculty of 
knowledge, the elements of our judgments so far as they relate to 
pleasure or pain, that is, the elements of practical judgments, do not 
belong to transcendental philosophy, which is exclusively concerned 
with pure a priori modes of knowledge. 

1 \nur aufs Moralische.] [sinnlichen.] 



634 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

laws which are imperatives, that is, objective laws of freedom, 
which tell us what ought to happen although perhaps it never 
does happen therein differing from laws of nature, which 
relate only to that which happens. These laws are therefore to 
be entitled practical laws. 

B 831} Whether reason is not, in the actions through which it 
prescribes laws, itself again determined by other influences, 
and whether that which, in relation to sensuous impulses, is 
entitled freedom, may not, in relation to higher and more 
remote operating causes, be nature again, is a question which 
in the practical field does not concern us, since we are de- 
manding of reason nothing but the rule of conduct; it is a 
merely speculative question, which we can leave aside so long 
as we are considering what ought or ought not to be done. 
While we thus through experience know practical freedom to 
be one of the causes in nature, namely, to be a causality of 
reason in the determination of the will, transcendental free- 
dom demands the independence of this reason in respect of 
its causality, in beginning a series of appearances from all 
determining causes of the sensible world. Transcendental 
freedom is thus, as it would seem, contrary to the law of 
nature, and therefore to all possible experience; and so re- 
mains a problem. But this problem does not come within the 
province of reason in its practical employment; and we have 
therefore in a canon of pure reason to deal with only two 
questions, which relate to the practical interest of pure reason, 
and in regard to which a canon of its employment must be 
possible Is there a God? and, Is there a future life? The 
question of transcendental freedom is a matter for speculative 

B 832} knowledge only, and when we are dealing with the practical, 
we can leave it aside as being an issue with which we have 
no concern. Moreover, a quite sufficient discussion of it is to 
be found in the antinomy of pure reason. 



THE CANON OF PURE REASON 63$ 

THE CANON OF PURE REASON 
Section 2 

THE IDEAL OF THE HIGHEST GOOD, AS A DETERMINING 
GROUND OF THE ULTIMATE END OF PURE REASON 

Reason, in its speculative employment, conducted us 
through the field of experience, and since it could not find 
complete satisfaction there, from thence to speculative 
ideas, which, however, in the end brought us back to experi- 
ence. In so doing the ideas fulfilled their purpose, but in a 
manner which, though useful, is not in accordance with our 
expectation. One other line of enquiry still remains open to 
us: namely, whether pure reason may not also be met with 
in the practical sphere, and whether it may not there conduct 
us to ideas which reach to those highest ends of pure reason 
that we have just stated, and whether, therefore, reason may 
not be able to supply to us from the standpoint of its practical 
interest what it altogether refuses to supply in respect of its 
speculative interest. 

All the interests of my reason, speculative as well as 
practical, combine in the three following questions: 

1. What can I know? { |5 

2. What ought I to do? 33 

3. What may I hope? 

The first question is merely speculative. We have, as I 
flatter myself, exhausted all the possible answers to it, and at 
last have found the answer with which reason must perforce 
content itself, and with which, so long as it takes no account of 
the practical, it has also good cause to be satisfied. But from 
the two great ends to which the whole endeavour of pure 
reason was really directed, we have remained just as far re- 
moved as if through love of ease we had declined this labour 
of enquiry at the very outset. So far, then, as knowledge is 
concerned, this much, at least, is certain and definitively 
established, that in respect of these two latter problems, know- 
ledge is unattainable by us. 

second question is purely practical. As such it can 



636 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

indeed come within the scope of pure reason, but even so is not 
transcendental but moral, and cannot, therefore, in and by 
itself, form a proper subject for treatment in this Critique. 

The third question If I do what I ought to do, what may 
I then hope? is at once practical and theoretical, in such 
fashion that the practical serves only as a clue that leads us to 
the answer to the theoretical question, and when this is followed 
out, to the speculative question. For all hoping is directed to 
happiness, and stands in the same relation to the practical and 
the law of morality as knowing and the law of nature to the 

B g. I theoretical knowledge of things. The former arrives finally 
at the conclusion that something is (which determines the 
ultimate possible end) because something ought to happen] 
the latter, that something is (which operates as the supreme 
cause) because something happens. 

Happiness is the satisfaction of all our desires, extensively, 
in respect of their manifoldness, intensively, in respect of 
their degree, and protensively ', in respect of their duration. 
The practical law, derived from the motive of happiness, I 
term pragmatic (rule of prudence), and that law, if there is 
such a law, which has no other motive than worthiness of 
being happy, I term moral (law of morality). The former 
advises us what we have to do if we wish to achieve happiness; 
the latter dictates to us how we must behave in order to de- 
serve happiness. The former is based on empirical principles; 
for only by means of experience can I know what desires there 
are which call for satisfaction; or what those natural causes 
are which are capable of satisfying them. The latter takes no 
account of desires, and the natural means of satisfying them, 
and considers only the freedom of a rational being in general, 
and the necessary conditions under which alone this freedom 
can harmonise with a distribution of happiness that is made 
in accordance with principles. This latter law can therefore be 
based on mere ideas of pure reason, and known a priori. 

B 835} I assume that there really are pure moral laws which de- 
termine completely a priori (without regard to empirical 
motives, that is, to happiness) what is and is not to be done, 
that is, which determine the employment of the freedom of a 
rational being in general; and that these laws command in an 
absolute manner (not merely hypothetically, on the supposi- 



THE CANON OF PURE REASON 637 

tion of other empirical ends), and are therefore in every respect 
necessary. I am justified in making this assumption, in that I 
can appeal not only to the proofs employed by the most en- 
lightened moralists, but to the moral judgment of every man, 
in so far as he makes the effort to think such a law clearly. 

Pure reason, then, contains, not indeed in its speculative 
employment, but in that practical employment which is also 
moral, principles of the possibility of experience, namely, of 
such actions as, in accordance with moral precepts, might be 
met with in the history of mankind. For since reason com- 
mands that such actions should take place, it must be possible 
for them to take place. Consequently, a special kind of system- 
atic unity, namely the moral, must likewise be possible 
We have indeed found that the systematic unity of nature 
cannot be proved in accordance with speculative principles 
of reason. For although reason does indeed have causality in 
respect of freedom in general, it does not have causality in 
respect of nature as a whole; and although moral principles 
of reason can indeed give rise to free actions, they cannot give 
rise to laws of nature. Accordingly it is in their practical, | B g^ 6 
meaning thereby their moral, employment, that the principles 
of pure reason have objective reality. 

I entitle the world a moral world, in so far as it may be in 
accordance with all moral laws; and this is what by means of 
the freedom of the rational being it can be, and what according 
to the necessary laws of morality it ought to be. Owing to our 
here leaving out of account all conditions (ends) and even all 
the special difficulties to which morality is exposed (weakness 
or depravity of human nature), this world is so far thought as 
an intelligible world only. To this extent, therefore, it is a 
mere idea, though at the same time a practical idea, which 
really can have, as it also ought to have, an influence upon the 
sensible world, to bring that world, so far as may be possible, 
into conformity with the idea. The idea of a moral world has, 
therefore, objective reality, not as referring to an object of an 
intelligible intuition (we are quite unable to think any such 
object), but as referring to the sensible world, viewed, however, 
as being an object of pure reason in its practical employ- 
ment, that is, as a corpus mysticum of the rational beings in it, 
so far }is the free will of each being is, under moral laws, in 



638 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

complete systematic unity with itself and with the freedom 
of every other. 

This is the answer to the first of the two questions of pure 
reason that concern its practical interest: Do that through 
B 837} which thou becomest worthy to be happy. The second question 
is: If I so behave as not to be unworthy of happiness, may I 
hope thereby to obtain happiness? In answering this question 
we have to consider whether the principles of pure reason, 
which prescribe the law a priori, likewise connect this hope 
necessarily with it. 

I maintain that just as the moral principles are necessary 
according to reason in its practical employment, it is in the 
view of reason, in the field of its theoretical employment, no 
less necessary to assume that everyone has ground to hope 
for happiness in the measure in which he has rendered himself 
by his conduct worthy of it, and that the system of morality 
is therefore inseparably though only in the idea of pure ' 
reason bound up with that of happiness. 

Now in an intelligible world, that is, in the moral world, in 
the concept of which we leave out of account all the hindrances 
to morality (the desires), such a system, in which happiness is 
bound up with and proportioned to morality, can be con- 
ceived as necessary, inasmuch as freedom, partly inspired and 
partly restricted by moral laws, would itself be the cause of 
general happiness, since rational beings, under the guidance 
of such principles, would themselves be the authors both of 
their own enduring well-being and of that of others. But such 
B 818 } a svstem f self-rewarding morality is only an idea, the carry- 
ing out of which rests on the condition that everyone does 
what he ought, that is, that all the actions of rational beings 
take place just as if they had proceeded from a supreme will 
that comprehends in itself, or under itself, all private wills. 
But since the moral law remains binding for every one in the 
use of his freedom, even although others do not act in con- 
formity with the law, neither the nature of the things of the 
world nor the causality of the actions themselves and their 
relation to morality determine how the consequences of these 
actions will be related to happiness. The alleged necessary 
connection of the hope of happiness with the necessary en- 
deavour to render the self worthy of happiness cannQt there- 



THE CANON OF PURE REASON 639 

fore be known through reason. It can be counted upon only if 
a Supreme Reason^ that governs according to moral rules, be 
likewise posited as underlying nature as its cause. 

The idea of such an intelligence in which the most perfect 
moral will, united with supreme blessedness, is the cause of all 
happiness in the world so far as happiness stands in exact re- 
lation with morality, that is, with worthiness to be happy I 
entitle the ideal of the supreme good. It is, therefore, only in the 
ideal of the supreme original good that pure reason can find 
the ground of this connection, which is necessary from the prac- 
tical point of view, between the two elements of the supreme |g |" 
derivative good the ground, namely, of an intelligible, that is, 
moral world. Now since we are necessarily constrained by reason 
to represent ourselves as belonging to such a world, while the 
senses present to us nothing but a world of appearances, we 
must assume that moral world to be a consequence of our con- 
duct in the world of sense (in which no such connection be- 
tween worthiness and happiness is exhibited), and therefore to 
be for us a future world. Thus God and a future life are two 
postulates which, according to the principles of pure reason, 
are inseparable from the obligation which that same reason 
imposes upon us. 

Morality, by itself, constitutes a system. Happiness, how- 
ever, does not do so, save in so far as it is distributed in exact 
proportion to morality. But this is possible only in the intel- 
ligible world, under a wise Author and Ruler. Such a Ruler, 
together with life in such a world, which we must regard as a 
future world, reason finds itself constrained to assume; other- 
wise it would have to regard the moral laws as empty figments 
of the brain, since without this postulate the necessary conse- 
quence which it itself connects with these laws could not 
follow. Hence also everyone regards the moral laws as com- 
mands-, and this the moral laws could not be if they did not 
connect a priori suitable consequences with their rules, and 
thus carry with them promises and threats. But this again they 
could not do, if they did not reside in a necessary being, as the 
supreme good, which alone can make such a purposive unity 
possible. 

Leibniz entitled the world, in so far as we take account 
only of the rational beings in it, and of their connection ac- 



640 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

cording to moral laws under the government of the supreme 
good, the kingdom of grace, distinguishing it from the king- 
dom of nature, in which these rational beings do indeed stand 
under moral laws, but expect no other consequences from 
their actions than such as follow in accordance with the course 
of nature in our world of sense. To view ourselves, therefore, as 
in the world of grace, where all happiness awaits us, except in so 
far as we ourselves limit our share in it through being unworthy 
of happiness, is, from the practical standpoint, a necessary idea 
of reason. 

Practical laws, in so far as they are subjective grounds of 
actions, that is, subjective principles, are entitled maxims. The 
estimation of morality, in regard to its purity and consequences, 
is effected in accordance with ideas, the observance of its laws 
in accordance with maxims. 

It is necessary that the whole course of our life be sub- 
ject to moral maxims; but it is impossible that this should 
happen unless reason connects with the moral law, which is a 
mere idea, an operative cause which determines for such con- 
duct as is in accordance with the moral law an outcome, either 
B 841} m tkis or in another life, that is in exact conformity with our 
supreme ends. Thus without a God and without a world in- 
visible to us now but hoped for, the glorious ideas of morality 
are indeed objects of approval and admiration, but not springs 
of purpose and action. For they do not fulfil in its complete- 
ness that end which is natural to every rational being and 
which is determined a priori, and rendered necessary, by that 
same pure reason. 

Happiness, taken by itself, is, for our reason, far from 
being the complete good. Reason does not approve happiness 
(however inclination may desire it) except in so far as it is united 
with worthiness to be happy, that is, with moral conduct. 
Morality, taken by itself, and with it, the mere worthiness to 
be happy, is also far from being the complete good. To make 
the good complete, he who behaves in such a manner as not to 
be unworthy of happiness must be able to hope that he will 
participate in happiness. Even the reason that is free from all 
private purposes, should it put itself in the place of a being that 
had to distribute all happiness to others, cannot judge other- 
wise; for in the practical idea both elements are essentially 



THE CANON OF PURE REASON 64! 

connected, though in such a manner that it is the moral dis- 
position which conditions and makes possible the participation 
in happiness, and not conversely the prospect of happiness 
that makes possible the moral disposition. For in the latter 
case the disposition would not be moral, and therefore would 
not be worthy of complete happiness happiness which in 
the view of reason allows of no limitation save that which 
arises from our own immoral conduct. 

Happiness, therefore, in exact proportion with the morality 
of the rational beings who are thereby rendered worthy of it, 
alone constitutes the supreme good of that world wherein, in 
accordance with the commands of a pure but practical reason, 
we are under obligation to place ourselves. This world is in- 
deed an intelligible world only, since the sensible world holds 
out no promise that any such systematic unity of ends can 
arise from the nature of things. Nor is the reality of this unity 
based on anything else than the postulate of a supreme ori- 
ginal good. In a supreme good, thus conceived, self-subsistent 
reason, equipped with all the sufficiency of a supreme cause, 
establishes, maintains, and completes the universal order of 
things, according to the most perfect design 1 an order which 
in the world of sense is in large part concealed from us. 

This moral theology has the peculiar advantage over 
speculative theology that it inevitably leads to the concept of 
a sote, all-perfect^ and rational primordial being, to which 
speculative theology does not, on objective grounds, even so 
much as point the way, and as to the existence of which it is 
still less capable of yielding any conviction. For neither in 
transcendental nor in natural theology, however far reason 
may carry us, do we find any considerable ground for assum- 
ing only some one single being which we should be justi- |g 
fied in placing prior to 2 all natural causes, and upon which 
we might make them in all respects dependent. On the 
other hand, if we consider from the point of view of moral 
unity, as a necessary law of the world, what the cause must 
be that can alone give to this law its appropriate effect, and 
so for us obligatory force, we conclude that there must be 
one sole supreme will, which comprehends all these laws in 
itself. For how, under different wills, should we find complete 

1 \Zw\ckmassigkeit\ a [Reading, with Wille, yorzusetzen for verse tzen.] 

21 



642 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

unity of ends. This Divine Being must be omnipotent, in 
order that the whole of nature and its relation to morality 
in the world may be subject to his will; omniscient, that 
He may know our innermost sentiments and their moral 
worth; omnipresent, that He may be immediately at hand for 
the satisfying of every need which the highest good demands; 
eternal, that this harmony of nature and freedom may never 
fail, etc. 

But this systematic unity of ends in this world of intelli- 
gences a world which is indeed, as mere nature, a sensible 
world only, but which, as a system of freedom, can be entitled 
an intelligible, that is, a moral world (regnumgratiae) leads in- 
evitably also to the purposive unity of all things, which constitute 
this great whole, in accordance with universal laws of nature(just 
as the former unity is in accordance with universal and neces- 
sary laws of morality), and thus unites the practical with the 
speculative reason. The world must be represented as having 
B 844} originated from an idea if it is to be in harmony with that em- 
ployment of reason without which we should indeed hold our- 
selves to be unworthy of reason, namely, with the moral em- 
ployment which is founded entirely on the idea of the supreme' 
good. In this way all investigation of nature tends to take the 
form of a system of ends, and in its widest extension becomes a 
physico-theology . But this, as it has its source in the moral order, 
as a unity grounded in freedom's own essential nature, and not 
accidentally instituted through external commands, connects 
the purposiveness of nature with grounds which must be 
inseparably connected a priori with the inner possibility of 
things, and so leads to a transcendental theology a theology 
which takes the ideal of supreme ontological perfection as a 
principle of systematic unity. And since all things have their 
origin in the absolute necessity of the one primordial being, 
that principle connects them in accordance with universal and 
necessary laws of nature. 

What use can we make of our understanding, even in re- 
spect of experience, if we do not propose ends to ourselves? 
But the highest ends are those of morality, and these we can 
know only as they are given us by pure reason. But though 
provided with these, and employing them as a clue, we cannot 
make use of the knowledge of nature in any serviceable, manner 



THE CANON OF PURE REASON 643 

in the building up of knowledge, unless nature has itself 
shown unity of design. 1 For without this unity we should our- {B 845 
selves have no reason, inasmuch as there would be no school 
for reason, and no fertilisation 2 through objects such as might 
afford materials for the necessary concepts. But the former 
purposive unity is necessary, and founded on the will's own 
essential nature, and this latter unity [of design in nature] 
which contains the condition of its application in concrete, 
must be so likewise. And thus the transcendental enlargement 
of our knowledge, as secured through reason, is not to be 
regarded as the cause, but merely as the effect of the practical 
purposiveness which pure reason imposes upon us. 

Accordingly we find, in the history of human reason, that 
until the moral concepts were sufficiently purified and deter- 
mined, and until the systematic unity of their ends was under- 
stood in accordance with these concepts and from necessary 
principles, the knowledge of nature, and even a quite con- 
siderable development of reason in many other sciences, could 
give rise only to crude and incoherent concepts of the Deity, 
or as sometimes happened resulted in an astonishing in- 
difference in regard to all such matters. A greater preoccupa- 
tion with moral ideas, which was rendered necessary by the 
extraordinarily pure moral law of our religion, made reason 
more acutely aware of its object, through the interest which it 
was compelled to take in it. And this came about, independ- 
ently of any influence exercised by more extended views of 
nature or by correct and reliable transcendental insight (for 
that has always been lacking). It was the moral ideas that gave |g |'| 
rise to that concept of the Divine Being which we now hold 
to be correct and we so regard it not because speculative 
reason convinces us of its correctness, but because it com- 
pletely harmonises with the moral principles of reason. Thus it 
is always only to pure reason, though only in its practical 
employment, that we must finally ascribe the merit of having 
connected with our highest interest a knowledge which reason 
can think only, and cannot establish, and of having thereby 
shown it to be, not indeed a demonstrated dogma, but a 
postulate which is absolutely necessary in view of what are 

reason's own most essential ends. 



1 \zweckmassige Einheit.] , 8 [Kultur.] 



6 1 44 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

But when practical reason has reached this goal, namely, 
the concept of a sole primordial being as the supreme good, 
it must not presume to think that it has raised itself above all 
empirical conditions of its application, and has attained to an 
immediate knowledge of new objects, and can therefore l start 
from this concept, and can deduce from it the moral laws 
themselves. For it is these very laws that have led us, in virtue 
of their inner practical necessity, to the postulate of a self- 
sufficient cause, or of a wise Ruler of the world, in order that 
through such agency effect may be given to them. We may 
not, therefore, in reversal of such procedure, regard them as 
accidental and as derived from the mere will of the Ruler, 
B 8 1 ?) es P ec i a ^y as we have no conception of such a will, except as 
formed in accordance with these laws. So far, then, as prac- 
tical reason has the right to serve as our guide, we shall not 
look upon actions as obligatory because they are the commands 
of God, but shall regard them as divine commands because 
we have an inward obligation to them. We shall study freedom 
according to the purposive unity that is determined in accord- 
ance with the principles of reason, and shall believe ourselves 
to be acting in conformity with the divine will in so far only 
as we hold sacred the moral law which reason teaches us from 
the nature of the actions themselves; and we shall believe that 
we can serve that will only by furthering what is best in the 
world, alike in ourselves and in others. Moral theology is thus 
of immanent use only. It enables us to fulfil our vocation in 
this present world by showing us how to adapt ourselves to the 
system of all ends, and by warning us against the fanaticism, 
and indeed the impiety, of abandoning the guidance of a 
morally legislative reason in the right conduct of our lives, in 
order to derive guidance directly from the idea of the Supreme 
Being. For we should then be making a transcendent em- 
ployment of moral theology; and that, 2 like a transcendent use 
of pure speculation, must pervert and frustrate the ultimate 
ends of reason. 

1 [Reading, with Hartenstein, nun for um.] 
* [Reading, with Grille, der aber for aber.] 



THE CANON OF PURE REASON 645 

THE CANON OF PURE REASON 

Section 3 
OPINING, KNOWING, AND BELIEVING 

The holding of a thing to be true is an occurrence in our 
understanding which, though it may rest on objective grounds, 
also requires subjective causes in the mind of the individual 
who makes the judgment. If the judgment is valid for everyone, 
provided only he is in possession of reason, its ground is ob- 
jectively sufficient, and the holding of it to be true is entitled 
conviction. If it has its ground only in the special character of 
the subject, it is entitled persuasion. 

Persuasion is a mere illusion, because the ground of the 
judgment, which lies solely in the subject, is regarded as objec- 
tive. Such a judgment has only private validity, and the hold- 
ing of it to be true does not allow of being communicated. 
But truth depends upon agreement with the object, and in re- 
spect of it the judgments of each and every understanding 
must therefore be in agreement with each other (consentientia 
uni tertio y consentiunt inter se). The criterion whereby we 
decide whether our holding a thing to be true is conviction 
or mere persuasion is therefore external, namely, the possi- 
bility of communicating it and of finding it to be valid for all 
human reason. For there is then at least a presumption that 
the ground of the agreement of all judgments with each other, 
notwithstanding the differing characters of individuals, rests 
upon the common ground, namely, upon the object, and that 
it is for this reason that they are all in agreement with the 
object the truth of the judgment being thereby proved. 

So long, therefore, as the subject views the judgment merely 
as an appearance of his mind, persuasion cannot be subject- 
ively distinguished from conviction. The experiment, how- 
ever, whereby we test upon the understanding of others 
whether those grounds of the judgment which are valid for us 
have the same effect on the reason of others as on our own, is 
a means, although only a subjective means, not indeed of pro- 
ducing^cdViviction, but of detecting any merely private validity 



6*6 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

in the judgment, that is, anything in it which is mere per- 
suasion. 

If, in addition, we can specify the subjective causes of the 
judgment, which we have taken as being its objective grounds &gt; 
and can thus explain the deceptive judgment as an event in 
our mind, and can do so without having to take account of the 
character of the object, we expose the illusion and are no longer 
deceived by it, although always still in some degree liable to 
come under its influence, in so far as the subjective cause of 
the illusion is inherent in our nature. 

I cannot assert anything, that is, declare it to be a judg- 
ment necessarily valid for everyone, save as it gives rise to 
B 850} conviction. Persuasion I can hold to on my own account, if it 
so pleases me, but I cannot, and ought not, to profess to 
impose it as binding on anyone but myself. 

The holding of a thing to be true, or the subjective validity 
of the judgment, in its relation to conviction (which is at the 
same time objectively valid), has the following three degrees: 1 
opining, believing^ and knowing. Opining is such holding of a 
judgment as is consciously insufficient, not only objectively, 
but also subjectively. If our holding of the judgment be only 
subjectively sufficient, and is at the same time taken as being 
objectively insufficient, we have what is termed believing. 
Lastly, when the holding of a thing to be true is sufficient 
both subjectively and objectively, it is knowledge. The sub- 
jective sufficiency is termed conviction (for myself), the 
objective sufficiency is termed certainty (for everyone). 
There is no call for me to spend further time on the ex- 
planation of such easily understood terms. 

I must never presume to opine y without knowing at least 
something by means of which the judgment, in itself merely 
problematic, secures connection with truth, a connection 
which, although not complete, is yet more than arbitrary 
fiction. Moreover, the law of such a connection must be cer- 
tain. For if, in respect of this law also, .1 have nothing but 
opinion, it is all merely a play of the imagination, without the 
least relation to truth. Again, opining is not in any way per- 
missible in judging by means of pure reason. For since such 
B 851} Judging is not based on grounds of experience, but being in 

i [Stufen.} 



THE CANON OF PURE REASON 64? 

every case necessary has all to be arrived at a priori y the prin- 
ciple of the connection requires universality and necessity, and 
therefore complete certainty; otherwise we should have no 
guidance as to truth. Hence it is absurd to have an opinion 
in pure mathematics; either we must know, or we must 
abstain from all acts of judgment. It is so likewise in the case 
of the principles of morality, since we must not venture upon 
an action on the mere opinion that it is allowed, but must 
know it to be so. 

In the transcendental employment of reason, on the other 
hand, while opining is doubtless too weak a term to be ap- 
plicable, the term knowing is too strong. In the merely specu- 
lative sphere we cannot therefore make any judgments what- 
soever. For the subjective grounds upon which we may hold 
something to be true, such as those which are able to produce 
belief, are not permissible in speculative questions, inasmuch 
as they do not hold independently of all empirical support, 
and do not allow of being communicated in equal measure to 
others. 

But it is only from a practical point of view that the theo- 
retically insufficient holding of a thing to be true can be 
termed believing. This practical point of view is either in 
reference to skill or in reference to morality, the former being 
concerned with optional and contingent ends, the latter with 
ends that are absolutely necessary. 

Once an end is accepted, the conditions of its attainment 
are hypothetically necessary. This necessity is subjectively, 
but still only comparatively, sufficient, if I know of no other | B 
conditions under which the end can be attained. On the other 
hand, it is sufficient, absolutely and for everyone, if I know 
with certainty that no one can have knowledge of any other 
conditions which lead to the proposed end. In the former case 
my assumption and the holding of certain conditions to be 
true is a merely contingent belief; in the latter case it is a 
necessary belief. 1 The physician must do something for a 
patient in danger, but does not know the nature of his illness. 
He observes the symptoms, and if he can find no more likely 
alternative, judges it to be a case of phthisis. Now even in his 
own estimation his belief is contingent only; another observer 

1 [Glqube. This is also Kant's term for 'faith' (cf. above pp. 31, 296).] 



648 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

might perhaps come to a sounder conclusion. Such contingent 
belief, which yet forms the ground for the actual employment 
of means to certain actions, I entitle pragmatic belief. 

The usual test, whether that which someone asserts is 
merely his persuasion or at least his subjective conviction, 
that is, his firm belief is betting. It often happens that some- 
one propounds his views with such positive and uncompromis- 
ing assurance that he seems to have entirely set aside all 
thought of possible error. A bet disconcerts him. Sometimes 
it turns out that he has a conviction which can be estimated at 
a value of one ducat, but not of ten. For he is very willing to 
venture one ducat, but when it is a question of ten he becomes 

B 853} aware &gt; as he had not previously been, that it may very well be 
that he is in error. If, in a given case, we represent ourselves 
as staking the happiness of our whole life, the triumphant 
tone of our judgment is greatly abated; we become extremely 
diffident, and discover for the first time that our belief does not 
reach so far. Thus pragmatic belief always exists in some 
specific degree, which, according to differences in the interests 
at stake, may be large or may be small. 

But in many cases, when we are dealing with an object 
about which nothing can be done by us, and in regard to which 
our judgment is therefore purely theoretical, we can conceive 
and picture to ourselves an attitude 1 for which we regard 
ourselves as having sufficient grounds, while yet there is no 
existing means of arriving at certainty in the matter. Thus 
even in purely theoretical judgments there is an analogon 
of practical judgments, to the mental entertaining of which 
the term 'belief is appropriate, and which we may entitle 
doctrinal belief. I should be ready to stake my all on the con- 
tention were it possible by means of any experience to settle 
the question that at least one of the planets which we see is 
inhabited. Hence I say that it is not merely opinion, but a 
strong belief, on the correctness of which I should be prepared 
to run great risks, that other worlds are inhabited. 

B g* j Now we must admit that the doctrine of the existence of 
God belongs to doctrinal belief. For as regards theoretical 
knowledge of the world, I can cite nothing which necessarily 
presupposes this thought as the condition of my explanations 

1 \eine Unternehmung^\ 



THE CANON OF PURE REASON 649 

of the appearances exhibited by the world, but rather am 
bound so to employ my reason as if everything were mere 
nature. Purposive unity is, however, so important a condition 
of the application of reason to nature that I cannot ignore it, 
especially as experience supplies me so richly with examples of 
it. But I know no other condition under which this unity can sup- 
ply me with guidance in the investigation of nature, save only 
the postulate that a supreme intelligence has ordered all things 
in accordance with the wisest ends. Consequently, as a condi- 
tion of what is indeed a contingent, but still not unimportant 
purpose, namely, to have guidance in the investigation of 
nature, we must postulate a wise Author of the world. More- 
over, the outcome of my attempts [in explanation of nature] 
so frequently confirms the usefulness of this postulate, while 
nothing decisive can be cited against it, that I am saying much 
too little if I proceed to declare that I hold it merely as an 
opinion. Even in this theoretical relation it can be said that I 
firmly believe in God. This belief is not, therefore, strictly 
speaking, practical; it must be entitled a doctrinal belief, to | B ^ 
which the theology of nature (physico-theology) must always 
necessarily give rise. In view of the magnificent equipment of 
our human nature, and the shortness of life so ill-suited to the 
full exercise of our powers, we can find in this same divine 
wisdom a no less sufficient ground for a doctrinal belief in 
the future life of the human soul. 

In such cases the expression of belief is, from the objective 
point of view, an expression of modesty, and yet at the same 
time, from the subjective point of view, an expression of the 
firmness of our confidence. Were I even to go the length of 
describing the merely theoretical holding of the belief as an 
hypothesis which I am justified in assuming, I should thereby 
be pledging myself to have a more adequate concept of the 
character of a cause of the world and of the character of 
another world than I am really in a position to supply. For 
if I assume anything, even merely as an hypothesis, I must 
at least know so much of its properties that I require to 
assume, not its concept, but only its existence. The term 
'belief refers only to the guidance which an idea gives me, 
and to its subjective influence in that furthering of the activi- 
ties o niy reason which confirms me in the idea, and which 



KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

yet does so without my being in a position to give a specu- 
lative account of it. 

But the merely doctrinal belief is somewhat lacking in 
stability; we often lose hold of it, owing to the speculative 

B 855} difficulties which we encounter, although in the end we 
always inevitably return to it. 

It is quite otherwise with moral belief. For here it is abso- 
lutely necessary that something must happen, namely, that I 
must in all points conform to the moral law. The end is here 
irrefragably established, and according to such insight as I 
can have, there is only one possible condition under which this 
end can connect with all other ends, and thereby have prac- 
tical validity, namely, that there be a God and a future world. 
I also know with complete certainty that no one can be ac- 
quainted with any other conditions which lead x to the same 
unity of ends under the moral law. Since, therefore, the moral 
precept is at the same time my maxim (reason prescribing that 
it should be so), I inevitably believe in the existence of God 
and in a future life, and I am certain that nothing can shake' 
this belief, since my moral principles would thereby be them- 
selves overthrown, and I cannot disclaim them without be- 
coming abhorrent in my own eyes. 

Thus even after reason has failed in all its ambitious at- 
tempts to pass beyond the limits of all experience, there is 
still enough left to satisfy us, so far as our practical stand- 
point is concerned. No one, indeed, will be able to boast 

B 857} tnat ne knows that there is a God, and a future life; if he 
knows this, he is the very man for whom I have long [and 
vainly] sought. All knowledge, if it concerns an object of 
mere reason, can be communicated; and I might therefore 
hope that under his instruction my own knowledge would be 
extended in this wonderful fashion. No, my conviction is not 
logical, but moral certainty; and since it rests on subjective 
grounds (of the moral sentiment), I must not even say, 'It is 
morally certain that there is a God, etc/, but '/ am morally 
certain, etc. 1 In other words, belief in a God and in another 
world is so interwoven with my moral sentiment that as there 
is little danger of my losing the latter, there is equally little 
cause for fear that the former can ever be taken from me. 



1 [Reading, with Grille, fiihren for fuhre.} 



THE CANON OF PURE REASON 65* 

The only point that may seem questionable is the basing 
of 'this rational belief on the assumption of moral sentiments. 
If we leave these aside, and take a man who is completely 
indifferent with regard to moral laws, the question propounded 
by reason then becomes merely a problem for speculation, 
and can, indeed, be supported by strong grounds of analogy, 
but not by such as must compel the most stubborn scepticism 
to give way." But in these questions no man is free from all | B g ^g 
interest. For although, through lack of good sentiments, he 
may be cut off from moral interest, still even in this case 
enough remains to make him fear the existence of a God 
and a future life. Nothing more is required for this than that 
he at least cannot pretend that there is any certainty that 
there is no such being and no such life. Since that would have 
to be proved by mere reason, and therefore apodeictically, he 
would have to prove the impossibility of both, which assuredly 
no one can reasonably undertake to do. This may therefore 
serve as negative belief, which may not, indeed, give rise to 
morality and good sentiments, but may still give rise to an 
analogon of these, namely, a powerful check upon the out- 
break of evil sentiments. 

But, it will be said, is this all that pure reason achieves 
in opening up prospects beyond the limits of experience? 
Nothing more than two articles of belief? Surely the common 
understanding could have achieved as much, without appeal- |g JJ3* 
ing to philosophers for counsel in the matter 

I shall not here dwell upon the service which philosophy 
has done to human reason through the laborious efforts of its 
criticism, granting even that in the end it should turn out to 
be merely negative; something more will be said on this point 
in the next section. But I may at once reply: Do you really 
require that a mode of knowledge which concerns all men 

a The human mind (as, I likewise believe, must necessarily be the 
case with every rational being) takes a natural interest in morality, | B gj% 
although this interest is not undivided and practically preponderant. 
If we confirm and increase this interest, we shall find reason very 
teachable and in itself more enlightened as regards the uniting of the 
speculative with the practical interest. But if we do not take care that 
we first make men good, at least in some measure good, we shall never 
make hpnest believers of them. 



652 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

should transcend the common understanding, and should only 
be revealed to you by philosophers? Precisely what you find 
fault with is the best confirmation of the correctness of the 
above assertions. For we have thereby revealed to us, what 
could not at the start have been foreseen, namely, that in 
matters which concern all men without distinction nature is 
not guilty of any partial distribution of her gifts, and that in 
regard to the essential ends of human nature the highest 
philosophy cannot advance further than is possible under the 
guidance which nature has bestowed even upon the most 
ordinary 1 understanding. 

1 [gemeinsten.] 



THE TRANSCENDENTAL DOCTRINE OF METHOD 
CHAPTER III 

THE ARCHITECTONIC OF PURE REASON 

BY an architectonic I understand the art of constructing sys- 
tems. As systematic unity is what first raises ordinary know- 
ledge to the rank of science, that is, makes a system out of a 
mere aggregate of knowledge, architectonic is the doctrine of 
the scientific in our knowledge, and therefore necessarily 
forms part of the doctrine of method. 

In accordance with reason's legislative prescriptions, our 
diverse modes of knowledge must not be permitted to be a 
mere rhapsody, but must form a system. Only so can they 
further the essential ends of reason. By a system I understand 
the unity of the manifold modes of knowledge under one idea. 
This idea is the concept provided by reason of the form of a 
whole in so far as the concept determines a priori not only 
the scope of its manifold content, but also the positions which 
the parts occupy relatively to one another. The scientific con- 
cept of reason contains, therefore, the end and the form of that 
whole which is congruent with this requirement. The unity of 
the end to which all the parts relate and in the idea of which 
they all stand in relation to one another, makes it possible for 
us to determine from our knowledge of the other parts whether 
any part be missing, and to prevent any arbitrary addition, or 
in respect of its completeness any indeterminateness that does 
not conform to the limits which are thus determined a priori. 
The whole is thus an organised unity (articulatio), and not an 
aggregate (coacervatio). It may grow from within (per intus- 
susceptionem), but not by external addition (per appositionem). 
It is thus like an animal body, the growth of which is not by 

653 



(554 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

the addition of a new member, but by the rendering of each 
member, without change of proportion, stronger and more 
effective for its purposes. 

The idea requires for its realisation a schema, that is, a 
constituent 1 manifold and an order of its parts, both of which 
must be determined a priori from the principle defined by its 
end. The schema, which is not devised in accordance with an 
idea, that is, in terms of the ultimate aim of reason, but em- 
pirically in accordance with purposes that are contingently 
occasioned (the number of which cannot be foreseen) yields 
technical unity; whereas the schema which originates from an 
idea (in which reason propounds the ends a priori, and does 
not wait for them to be empirically given) serves as the basis 
of architectonic unity. Now that which we call science, the 
schema of which must contain the outline (monogramma) and 
B 862} t ^ ie Division f t ^ ie wn l e mto parts, in conformity with the 
idea, that is, a priori, and in so doing must distinguish it with 
certainty and according to principles from all other wholes, is 
not formed in technical fashion, in view of the similarity of 
its manifold constituents or of the contingent use of our know- 
ledge in concreto for all sorts of optional external ends, but in 
architectonic fashion, in view of the affinity of its parts and of 
their derivation from a single supreme and inner end, through 
which the whole is first made possible. 

No one attempts to establish a science unless he has an 
idea upon which to base it. But in the working out of the 
science the schema, nay even the definition which, at the start, 
he first gave of the science, is very seldom adequate to his idea. 
For this idea lies hidden in reason, like a germ in which the 
parts are still undeveloped and barely recognisable even under 
microscopic observation. Consequently, since sciences are de- 
vised from the point of view of a certain universal interest, 
we must not explain and determine them according to the 
description which their founder gives of them, but in con- 
formity with the idea which, out of the natural unity of the 
parts that we have assembled, we find to be grounded in 
reason itself. For we shall then find that its founder, and often 
even his latest successors, are groping for an idea which they 
have never succeeded in making clear to themselves, and that 



ARCHITECTONIC OF PURE REASON 655 

consequently they have not been in a position to determine the 
proper content, the articulation (systematic unity), and limits 
of the science. 

It is unfortunate that only after we have spent much time 
in the collection of materials in somewhat random fashion at 
the suggestion of an idea lying hidden in our minds, and after 
we have, indeed, over a long period assembled the materials in 
a merely technical manner, does it first become possible for |g g35 
us to discern the idea in a clearer light, and to devise a whole 
architectonically in accordance with the ends of reason. 
Systems seem to be formed in the manner of lowly organisms, 1 
through a generatio aequivoca from the mere confluence of 
assembled concepts, at first imperfect, and only gradually 
attaining to completeness, although they one and all have had 
their schema, as the original germ, in the sheer 2 self-develop- 
ment of reason. Hence, not only is each system articulated in 
accordance with an idea, but they are one and all organically 
united in a system of human knowledge, as members of one 
whole, and so as admitting of an architectonic of all human 
knowledge, which, at the present time, in view of the great 
amount of material that has been collected, or which can be 
obtained from the ruins of ancient systems, is not only pos- 
sible, but would not indeed be difficult. We shall content our- 
selves here with the completion of our task, namely, merely to 
outline the architectonic of all knowledge arising from pure 
reason] and in doing so we shall begin from the point at which 
the common root of our faculty of knowledge divides and 
throws out two stems, one of which is reason. By reason I here 
understand the whole higher faculty of knowledge, and am 
therefore contrasting the rational with the empirical. 

If I abstract from all the content of knowledge, objectively 
regarded, then all knowledge, subjectively regarded, is either | B 
historical or rational. Historical knowledge v&amp;cognitio ex datis\ 
rational knowledge is cognitio ex principiis. However a mode 
of knowledge may originally be given, it is still, in relation to 
the individual who possesses it, simply historical, if he knows 
only so much of it as has been given to him from outside (and 
this in the form in which it has been given to him), whether 
through immediate experience or narration, or (as in the case 

1 [wie Gewurme.] * [bless.] 



636 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

of general knowledge) through instruction. Anyone, therefore, 
who has learnt (in the strict sense of that term) a system of 
philosophy, such as that of Wolff, although he may have all 
its principles, explanations, and proofs, together with the 
formal divisions of the whole body of doctrine, in his head, 
and, so to speak, at his fingers' ends, has no more than a 
complete historical knowledge of the Wolffian philosophy. 
He knows and judges only what has been given him. If we 
dispute a definition, he does not know whence to obtain 
another. He has formed his mind on another's, and the imi- 
tative faculty is not itself productive. In other words, his 
knowledge has not in him arisen out of reason, and although, 
objectively considered, it is indeed knowledge due to reason, 
it is yet, in its subjective character, merely historical. He has 
grasped and kept; that is, he has learnt well, and is merely 
a plaster-cast of a living man. Modes of rational knowledge 
which are rational objectively (that is, which can have their 
first origin solely in human reason) can be so entitled sub- 
jectively also, only when they have been derived from uni- 
B 865} versa l sources of reason, that is, from principles the sources 
from which there can also arise criticism, nay, even the rejec- 
tion of what has been learnt. 

All knowledge arising out of reason is derived either from 
concepts or from the construction of concepts. The former is 
called philosophical, the latter mathematical. I have already 
treated of the fundamental difference between these two modes 
of knowledge in the first chapter [of this Transcendental Doc- 
trine of Method]. Knowledge [as we have just noted] can be 
objectively philosophical, and yet subjectively historical, as is 
the case with most novices, and with all those who have never 
looked beyond their School, and who remain novices all their 
lives. But it is noteworthy that mathematical knowledge, in its 
subjective character, and precisely as it has been learned, can 
also be regarded as knowledge arising out of reason, and that 
there is therefore in regard to mathematical knowledge no such 
distinction as we have drawn in the case of philosophical know- 
ledge. This is due to the fact that the sources of knowledge, 
from which alone the teacher can derive his knowledge, lie no- 
where but in the essential and genuine principles of reason, and 
consequently cannot be acquired by the novice from* any other 



ARCHITECTONIC OF PURE REASON 657 

source, and cannot be disputed; and this, in turn, is owing to 
the fact that the employment of reason is here in concrete only, 
although likewise a priori^ namely, in intuition which is pure, 
and which precisely on that account is infallible, 1 excluding 
all illusion and error. Mathematics, therefore, alone of all the 
sciences (a priori) arising from reason, can be learned; philo- 
sophy can never be learned, save only in historical fashion; 
as regards what concerns reason, we can at most learn to 
philosophise. 

Philosophy is the system of all philosophical knowledge. 
If we are to understand by it the archetype for the estimation 
of all attempts at philosophising, and if this archetype 2 is to 
serve for the estimation of each subjective philosophy, the struc- 
ture of which is often so diverse and liable to alteration, it must 
be taken objectively. Thus regarded, philosophy is a mere idea 
of a possible science which nowhere exists in concrete, but to 
which, by many different paths, we endeavour to approximate, 
ointil the one true path, overgrown by the products of sen- 
sibility, has at last been discovered, and the image, hitherto 
so abortive, has achieved likeness to the archetype, so far as 
this is granted to [mortal] man. Till then we cannot learn 
philosophy; for where is it, who is in possession of it, and how 
shall we recognise it? We can only learn to philosophise, that 
is, to exercise the talent of reason, in accordance with its 
universal principles, on certain actually existing attempts at 
philosophy, always, however, reserving the right of reason to 
investigate, to confirm, or to reject these principles in their 
very sources. 

Hitherto the concept of philosophy has been a merely schol- 
astic concept a concept of a system of knowledge which is 
sought solely in its character as a science, and which has there- 
fore in view only the systematic unity appropriate to science, 
and consequently no more than the logical perfection of know- 
ledge. But there is likewise another concept of philosophy, a 
conceptus cosmicus, which has always formed the real basis of 
the term 'philosophy', especially when it has been as it were 
personified and its archetype represented in the ideal philo- 
sopher. On this view, philosophy is the science of the relation 
of all knowledge to the essential ends of human reason 

1 [feft/er/reien.] a [Reading, with Rosenkr^nz, welches for welche.] 



658 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

(teleologia rationis humanae\ and the philosopher is not an 
artificer in the field of reason, but himself the lawgiver of 
human reason. In this sense of the term it would be very 
vainglorious to entitle oneself a philosopher, and to pretend 
to have equalled the pattern which exists in the idea alone. 

The mathematician, the natural philosopher, and the 
logician, however successful the two former may have been in 
their advances in the field of rational knowledge, and the two 
latter more especially in philosophical knowledge, are yet only 
artificers in the field of reason. There is a teacher, [conceived] 
in the ideal, who sets them their tasks, and employs them as 
instruments, to further the essential ends of human reason. 
Him alone we must call philosopher; but as he nowhere exists, 
while the idea of his legislation is to be found in that reason 
with which every human being is endowed, we shall keep 
entirely to the latter, determining more precisely what philo- 
sophy prescribes as regards systematic unity, in accordance 
B 868 1 w **k *k ls cosmical concept, a from the standpoint of its essential 
ends. 

Essential ends are not as such the highest ends; in vdew 
of the demand of reason for complete systematic unity, only 
one of them can be so described. Essential ends are therefore 
either the ultimate end or subordinate ends which are neces- 
sarily connected with the former as means. The former is no 
other than the whole vocation of man, and the philosophy 
which deals with it is entitled moral philosophy. On account 
of this superiority which moral philosophy has over all other 
occupations of reason, the ancients in their use of the term 
'philosopher' always meant, more especially, the moralist', and 
even at the present day we are led by a certain analogy to 
entitle anyone a philosopher who appears to exhibit self-control 
under the guidance of reason, however limited his knowledge 
may be. 

The legislation of human reason (philosophy) has two 
objects, nature and freedom, and therefore contains not only 

a By 'cosmical concept* [Weltbegriff] is here meant the concept 
which relates to that in which everyone necessarily has an interest; 
and accordingly if a science is to be regarded merely as one of the 
disciplines designed in view of certain optionally chosen cads, I must 
determine it in conformity with scholastic concepts. 



ARCHITECTONIC OF PURE REASON 

the law of nature, but also the moral law, presenting them 
at first in two distinct systems, but ultimately in one single 
philosophical system. The philosophy of nature deals with all 
that is, the philosophy of morals with that which ought to be. 

All philosophy is either knowledge arising out of pure 
reason, or knowledge obtained by reason from empirical 
principles. The former is termed pure, the latter empirical 
philosophy. 

The philosophy of pure reason is either a propaedeutic { 8,869 
(preparation), which investigates the faculty of reason in 
respect of all its pure a priori knowledge, and is entitled 
criticism?- or secondly, it is the system of pure reason, that is, 
the science which exhibits in systematic connection the whole 
body (true as well as illusory) of philosophical knowledge 
arising out of pure reason, and which is entitled metaphysics. 
The title 'metaphysics' may also, however, be given to the 
whole of pure philosophy, inclusive of criticism, and so as com- 
prehending the investigation of all that can ever be known 
a priori as well as the exposition of that which constitutes a 
system of the pure philosophical modes of knowledge of this 
type in distinction, therefore, from all empirical and from 
all mathematical employment of reason. 

Metaphysics is divided into that of the speculative and that 
of the practical employment of pure reason, and is there- 
fore either metaphysics of nature or metaphysics of morals. 
The former contains all the principles of pure reason that 
are derived from mere concepts (therefore excluding mathe- 
matics), and employed in the theoretical knowledge of all 
things; the latter, the principles which in a priori fashion 
determine and make necessary all our actions?" Now morality 
is the only code of laws applying to our actions which can 
be derived completely a priori from principles. Accordingly, 
the metaphysics of morals is really pure moral philosophy, 
with no underlying basis of anthropology or of other empirical | B ^ 
conditions. The term 'metaphysics', in its strict* sense, is com- 
monly reserved for the metaphysics of speculative reason. 
But as pure moral philosophy really forms part of this special 

1 [Kritik.} 2 [das Tun und Lassen.] 

5 [Reading, with the 4th edition, in eigenen Verstande for im engeren 
VerstanVe.} 



660 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

branch of human and philosophical knowledge derived from 
pure reason, we shall retain for it the title Metaphysics'. We 
are not, however, at present concerned with it, and may there- 
fore leave it aside. 

It is of the utmost importance to isolate the various modes 
of knowledge according as they differ in kind and in origin, 
and to secure that they be not confounded owing to the fact 
that usually, in our employment of them, they are combined. 
What the chemist does in the analysis of substances, and 
the mathematician in his special disciplines, is in still greater 
degree incumbent upon the philosopher, that he may be able 
to determine with certainty the part which belongs to each 
special kind of knowledge in the diversified employment of the 
understanding and its special value and influence. Human 
reason, since it first began to think, or rather to reflect, has never 
been able to dispense with a metaphysics; but also has never 
been able to obtain it in a form sufficiently free from all foreign 
elements. The idea of such a science is as old as speculative 
human reason; and what rational being does not speculate, 
either in scholastic or in popular fashion? It must be admitted, 
B 871} however, that the two elements of our knowledge that 
which is in our power 1 completely a priori y and that which is 
obtainable only a posteriori from experience have never been 
very clearly distinguished, not even by professional thinkers, 
and that they have therefore failed to bring about the delimita- 
tion of a special kind of knowledge, and thereby the true idea 
of the science which has preoccupied human reason so long and 
so greatly. When metaphysics was declared to be the science 
of the first principles of human knowledge, the intention was 
not to mark out a quite special kind of knowledge, but only 
a certain precedence in respect of generality, which was not 
sufficient to distinguish such knowledge from the empirical. 
For among empirical principles we can distinguish some that 
are more general, and so higher in rank than others; but 
where in such a series of subordinated members a series in 
which we do not distinguish what is completely a priori from 
what is known only a posteriori are we to draw the line 
which distinguishes the highest or first members from the 
lower subordinate members? What should we say,, if in the 
1 [Gtwatt.] 



ARCHITECTONIC OF PURE REASON 66j 

reckoning of time we could distinguish the epochs of the 
world only by dividing them into the first centuries and those 
that follow? We should ask: Does the fifth, the tenth century, 
etc., belong with the first centuries? So in like manner I ask: 
Does the concept of the extended belong to metaphysics? 
You answer, Yes. Then, that of body too? Yes. And that of 
fluid body? You now become perplexed; for at this rate every- 
thing will belong to metaphysics. It is evident, therefore, that 
the mere degree of subordination (of the particular 1 under 
the general) cannot determine the limits of a science; in the 
case under consideration, only complete difference of kind and 
of origin will suffice. But the fundamental idea of metaphysics 
was obscured on yet another side, owing to its exhibiting, as 
a priori knowledge, a certain similarity to mathematics. 
Certainly they are related, in so far as they both have an 
a priori origin; but when we bear in mind the difference 
between philosophical and mathematical knowledge, namely, 
that the one is derived from concepts, whereas in the other 
we arrive at a priori judgments only through the construction 
of concepts, we have to recognise a decided difference of kind, 
which has indeed always been in a manner felt but could 
never be defined by means of any clear criteria. Thus it 
has come about that since philosophers failed in the task of 
developing even the idea of their science, they could have 
no determinate end or secure guidance in the elaboration 
of it, and, accordingly, in this arbitrarily conceived enter- 
prise, ignorant as they were of the path to be taken, they have 
always been at odds with one another as regards the dis- 
coveries which each claimed to have made on his own separate 
path, with the result that their science has been brought into 
contempt, first among outsiders, and finally even among 
themselves. 

All pure a priori knowledge, owing to the special faculty | B 
of knowledge in which alone it can originate, has in itself a 
peculiar unity; and metaphysics is the philosophy which has 
as its task the statement of that knowledge in this systematic 
unity. Its speculative part, which has especially appropriated 
this name, namely, what we entitle metaphysics of nature } and 
which considers everything in so far as it is (not that which 

[leading, with Erdmann, des Besondren for das Besondere.} 



362 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

ought to be) by means of a priori concepts, is divided in the 
following manner. 

Metaphysics, in the narrower meaning of the term, con- 
sists of transcendental philosophy and physiology of pure 
reason. The former treats only of the understanding and of 
reason, in a system of concepts and principles which relate to 
objects in general but take no account of objects that may be 
given (Ontologid)\ the latter treats of nature, that is, of the 
sum of g iven objects (whether given to the senses, or, if we will, 
to some other kind of intuition) and is therefore physiology 
although only rationales. The employment of reason in this 
rational study of nature is either physical or hyperphysical, 
or, in more adequate terms, is either immanent or transcen- 
dent. The former is concerned with such knowledge of nature 
as can be applied in experience (in concretd), the latter with 
that connection of objects of experience which transcends 
a ^ ex P er i ence - This transcendent physiology has as its object 
either an inner connection or an outer connection, both, how- 
ever, transcending possible experience. As dealing with an' 
inner connection it is the physiology of nature as a whole, 
that is, the transcendental knowledge of the world] as dealing 
with an outer connection, it is the physiology of the relation 
of nature as a whole to a being above nature, that is to say, 
it is the transcendental knowledge of God. 

Immanent physiology, on the other hand, views nature as 
the sum of all objects of the senses, and therefore just as it is 
given us, but solely in accordance with a priori conditions, 
under which alone it can ever be given us. There are only two 
kinds of such objects. I. Those of the outer senses, and so 
their sum, corporeal nature. 2. The object of inner sense, 
the soul, and in accordance with our fundamental concepts of 
it, thinking nature. The metaphysics of corporeal nature is 
entitled physics\ and as it must contain only the principles of 
an a priori knowledge of it, rational physics . The metaphysics 
of thinking nature is entitled psychology, and on the same 
ground is to be understood as being only the rational know- 
ledge of it. 

The whole system of metaphysics thus consists of four 
main parts: (i) ontology; (2) rational physiology; (3) rational 
cosmology; (4) rational theology. The second part, namely, 



ARCHITECTONIC OF PURE REASON 663 



the doctrine of nature as developed by pure reason, contains | B 
two divisions, physica rationalis a and psychologia rationalis. 

The originative 1 idea of a philosophy of pure reason itself 
prescribes this division, which is therefore architectonic, in 
accordance with the essential ends of reason, and not merely 
technical^ in accordance with accidentally observed simil- 
arities, and so instituted as it were at haphazard. Accordingly 
the division is also unchangeable and of legislative authority. 
There are, however, some points which may well seem doubt- 
ful, and may weaken our conviction as to the legitimacy of 
its claims. 

First of all, how can I expect to have knowledge a priori 
(and therefore a metaphysics) of objects in so far as they are 
given to our senses, that is, given in an a posteriori manner? 
And how is it possible to know the nature of things and 
to arrive at a rational physiology according to principles 
apriorit The answer is this: we take nothing more from experi- 
ence than is required to give us an object of outer or of inner 
sense. The object of outer sense we obtain through the mere 
concept of matter (impenetrable, lifeless extension), the object 
of inner sense through the concept of a thinking being (in the 
empirical inner representation, 'I think'). As to the rest, in the 
whole metaphysical treatment of these objects, we must en- 
tirely dispense with all empirical principles which profess to 
add to these concepts any other more special experience, with 
a view to our passing further judgments upon the objects. 

Secondly, how are we to regard empirical psychology, 

I must not be taken as meaning thereby what is commonly 
called physica generalis\ the latter is rather mathematics than phil- 
osophy of nature. The metaphysics of nature is quite distinct from 
mathematics. It is very far from enlarging our knowledge in the 
fruitful manner of mathematics, but still is very important as yield- 
ing a criticism of the pure knowledge of understanding in its 
application to nature. For lack of it, even mathematicians, holding 
to certain common concepts, which though common are yet in 
fact metaphysical, have unconsciously encumbered their doctrine 
of nature with hypotheses which vanish upon criticism of the prin- 
ciples involved, without, however, doing the least injury to the 
employment of mathematics employment which is quite indis- 
pensable in this field. 

1 \urspriingliche .] 



664 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 
i 

which has always claimed its place in metaphysics, and from 
which in our times such great things have been expected for 
the advancement of metaphysics, the hope of succeeding by 
a priori methods having been abandoned. I answer that it be- 
longs where the proper (empirical) doctrine of nature belongs, 
namely, by the side of applied philosophy, the a priori prin- 
ciples of which are contained in pure philosophy; it is therefore 
so far connected with applied philosophy, though not to be 
confounded with it. Empirical psychology is thus completely 
banished from the domain of metaphysics; it is indeed already 
completely excluded by the very idea of the latter science. In 
conformity, however, with scholastic usage we must allow it 
some sort of a place (although as an episode only) in meta- 
physics, and this from economical motives, because it is not yet 
so rich as to be able to form a subject of study by itself, and yet 
is too important to be entirely excluded and forced to settle 
elsewhere, in a neighbourhood that might well prove much 
less congenial than that of metaphysics. Though it is but a 
stranger it has long been accepted as a member of the house- 
hold, and we allow it to stay for some time longer, until it is in 
a position to set up an establishment of its own in a complete 
anthropology, the pendant to the empirical doctrine of nature. 
Such, then, in general, is the idea of metaphysics. At first 
more was expected from metaphysics than could reasonably be 
demanded, and for some time it diverted itself with pleasant 
anticipations. But these hopes having proved deceptive, it 
has now fallen into general disrepute. The argument of our 
Critique, taken as a whole, must have sufficiently convinced 
the reader that although metaphysics cannot be the foundation 
of religion, it must always continue to be a bulwark of it, and 
that human reason, being by its very nature dialectical, can 
never dispense with such a science, which curbs it, and by a 
scientific and completely convincing self-knowledge, prevents 
the devastations of which a lawless speculative reason would 
otherwise quite inevitably be guilty in the field of morals as 
well as in that of religion. We can therefore be sure that how- 
B 878 ever cold or contemptuously critical may be the attitude of 
A 850 those who judge a science not by its nature but by its acci- 
dental effects, we shall always return to metaphysics as to a be- 
loved one with whom we have had a quarrel. For her? we are 



ARCHITECTONIC OF PURE REASON 66$ 

concerned with essential ends ends with which metaphysics 
must ceaselessly occupy itself, either in striving for genuine 
insight into them, or in refuting those who profess already to 
have attained it. 

Metaphysics, alike of nature and of morals, and especially 
that criticism of our adventurous and self-reliant reason which 
serves as an introduction or propaedeutic to metaphysics, 
alone properly constitutes what may be entitled philosophy, 
in the strict sense of the term. Its sole preoccupation is wisdom; 
and it seeks it by the path of science, which, once it has been 
trodden, can never be overgrown, and permits of no wander- 
ing. Mathematics, natural science, even our empirical know- 
ledge, have a high value as means, for the most part, to con- 
tingent ends, but also, in the ultimate outcome, to ends that 
are necessary and essential to humanity. This latter service, 
however, they can discharge only as they are aided by a know- 
ledge through reason from pure concepts, which, however we 
may choose to entitle it, is really nothing but metaphysics. 

For the same reason metaphysics is also the full and com- 
plete development 1 of human reason. Quite apart from its 
influence, as science, in connection with certain specific ends, 
it is an indispensable discipline. For in dealing with reason it 
treats of those elements and highest maxims which must form 
the basis of the very possibility of some sciences, and of the 
use of all. That, as mere speculation, it serves rather to prevent 
errors than to extend knowledge, does not detract from its 
value. On the contrary this gives it dignity and authority, 
through that censorship which secures general order and har- 
mony, and indeed the well-being of the scientific common- 
wealth, preventing those who labour courageously and fruit- 
fully on its behalf from losing sight of the supreme end, the 
happiness of all mankind. 

1 [die Vollendung aller Kultur.} 



THE TRANSCENDENTAL DOCTRINE OF METHOD 
CHAPTER IV 

THE HISTORY OF PURE REASON 

THIS title stands here only in order to indicate one remaining 
division of the system, which future workers must complete. 
I content myself with casting a cursory glance, from a purely 
transcendental point of view, namely, that of the nature of 
pure reason, on the works of those who have laboured in this 
field a glance which reveals [many stately] structures, but in . 
ruins only. 

It is a very notable fact, although it could not have been 
otherwise, that in the infancy of philosophy men began where 
we should incline to end, namely, with the knowledge of God, 
occupying themselves with the hope, or rather indeed with 
the specific nature, of another world. However gross the 
religious concepts generated by the ancient practices which 
still persisted in each community from an earlier more 
barbarous state, this did not prevent the more enlightened 
members from devoting themselves to free investigation of 
these matters; and they easily discerned that there could be 
no better ground 1 or more dependable way of pleasing the in- 
visible power that governs the world, and so of being happy 
A 8|3 j in another world at least, than by living the good life. Ac- 
cordingly theology and morals were the two motives, or rather 
the two points of reference, in all those abstract enquiries of 
reason to which men came to devote themselves. It was chiefly, 
however, the former that step by step committed the purely 
speculative reason to those labours which afterwards became 
so renowned under the name of metaphysics. 

1 [Reading, with Rosenkranz, grundlichere for grundlich^] 
666 



THE HISTORY OF PURE REASON 6fy 

I shall not here attempt to distinguish the periods of his- 
tory in which this or that change in metaphysics came about, 
but shall only give a cursory sketch of the various ideas which 
gave rise to the chief revolutions [in metaphysical theory]. 
And here I find that there are three issues in regard to 
which the most noteworthy changes have taken place in the 
course of the resulting controversies. 

1 . In respect of the object of all our 'knowledge through 
reason', some have been mere sensualists, others mere intel- 
lectualists. Epicurus may be regarded as the outstanding 
philosopher among the former, and Plato among the latter. 
The distinction between the two schools, subtle as it is, 
dates from the earliest times; and the two positions have 
ever since been maintained in unbroken continuity. Those 
of the former school maintained that reality is to be found 
solely in the objects of the senses, and that all else is fiction; 
those of the latter school, on the other hand, declared that 

in the senses there is nothing but illusion, and that only | B 
the understanding knows what is true. The former did not 
indeed deny reality to the concepts of the understanding; but 
this reality was for them merely logical, whereas for the others 
it was mystical. The former conceded intellectual concepts, but 
admitted sensible objects only. The latter required that true 
objects should be purely intelligible, and maintained that by 
means of the pure understanding we have an intuition that 
is unaccompanied by the senses the senses, in their view, 
serving only to confuse the understanding. 

2. In respect of the origin of the modes of 'knowledge 
through pure reason', the question is as to whether they are 
derived from experience, or whether in independence of ex- 
perience they have their origin in reason. Aristotle may be 
regarded as the chief of the empiricists, and Plato as the 
chief of the noologists. Locke, who in modern times followed 
Aristotle, and Leibniz, who followed Plato (although in con- 
siderable disagreement with his mystical system), have not 
been able to bring this conflict to any definitive conclusion. 
However we may regard Epicurus, he was at least much more 
consistent in this sensual system than Aristotle and Locke, 
inasmuch as he never sought to pass by inference beyond the 
limits of experience. This is especially true as regards Locke, 



668 KANT'S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

who, after having derived all concepts and principles from 
experience, goes so far in the use of them as to assert that we 
B III} can P rove *ke existence of God and the immortality of the 
soul with the same conclusiveness as any mathematical pro- 
position though both lie entirely outside the limits of 
possible experience. 

3. In respect of method. If anything is to receive the 
title of method, it must be a procedure in accordance with 
principles. We may divide the methods now prevailing in this 
field of enquiry into the naturalistic and the scientific. The 
naturalist of pure reason adopts as his principle that through 
common reason, without science, that is, through what he 
calls sound reason, he is able, in regard to those most sublime 
questions which form the problem of metaphysics, to achieve 
more than is possible through speculation. Thus he is virtu- 
ally asserting that we can determine the size and distance of 
the moon with greater certainty by the naked eye than by 
mathematical devices. This is mere misology, reduced to 
principles; and what is most absurd of all, the neglect of all 
artificial means is eulogised as a special method of extending 
our knowledge. For as regards those who are naturalists from 
lack of more insight, they cannot rightly be blamed. They 
follow common reason, without boasting of their ignorance 
as a method which contains the secret how we are to fetch 
truth from the deep well of Democritus. Quod sapio&gt; satis 
est mihi; non ego euro, esse quod Arcesilas aerumnosique 
Solones* is the motto with which they may lead a cheerful 
and praiseworthy life, not troubling themselves about science, 
nor by their interference bringing it into confusion. 

As regards those who adopt a scientific method, they have 
the choice of proceeding either dogmatically or sceptically, 
but in any case they are under obligation to proceed system- 
atically. I may cite the celebrated Wolif as a representative 
of the former mode of procedure, and David Hume as a repre- 
sentative of the latter, and may then, conformably with my 
present purpose, leave all others unnamed. The critical path 
alone is still open. If the reader has had the courtesy and 
patience to accompany me along this path, he may now judge 
for himself whether, if he cares to lend his aid in making this 
a Persius \Sat. iii. 78-79]. &lt;J 



THE HISTORY OF PURE REASON 669 

path into a high-road, it may not be possible to achieve be- 
fore the end of the present century what many centuries have 
not been able to accomplish; namely, to secure for human 
reason complete satisfaction in regard to that with which it 
has all along so eagerly occupied itself, though hitherto 
in vain. 


